Chapter Heading: Political parties, pressure groups, and the idea of competition.

Political parties and interest or pressure groups are a natural outgrowth in a democracy. They are active in all states and in all of the developed democracies worldwide. Although the founding fathers that wrote the Constitution of the United States may have wanted to resist "factions" or political parties and interest groups, their efforts proved unsuccessful. They themselves formed the first interest group and later political party to seek the ratification of their newly drafted constitution. Those interested in passing a certain policy strive at all levels of government to organize and thereby to optimize chances of getting their way. It is hard to imagine how a modern democracy could function without parties or pressure groups.

Fundamentally, political parties and pressure groups differ little from each other. When individuals realize that they share a desire for the same public policy, they can increase the chances of getting their way by organizing. The drafters of the new federal Constitution in 1787 shared an interest in getting it ratified. They organized to do so and succeeded, probably because those opposed to its ratification failed to organize. Even the most basic and agrarian society, such as the American states in the late 1700s, has different interests. Many states had the beginnings of industrial development and sought to keep inexpensive foreign goods out of the country to make their companies more profitable. Farmers everywhere wanted the less expensive foreign goods. Thus, we had the beginnings of regional division between the agricultural South and the North with fledgling manufacturing capabilities.

A modern complex society almost demands many organized interests, perhaps many thousands at the state level and even hundreds in local politics. Pressure groups, or to use a more neutral term, interest groups, organize such interests to exert their influence to get their interests best reflected in public policy.

Multiple shooting massacres in 2012 resulted in some restrictions on purchasing firearms and ammunition, but only in Colorado and Connecticut, sites of the most horrendous deaths. The National Rifle association easily defeated minor reforms at the federal level supported by more than 90 percent of Americans. Moreover, sales of firearms and ammunition spiked and several states made access to firearms and ammunition easier. Evidently, the NRA has been better organized than their opponents, as judged by public policy.

The anti-abortion or pro-life segment of opinion has been well organized for several years.  Recently, they have influenced many state legislatures to place restrictions to reduce the number of providers and impediments in the way of seekers of abortions. Pro-choice supporters have been much less organized. The success of their opponents in curtailing the availability of abortions may stimulate them to become better organized and more effective in the political arena.

Politics is winning and losing. The examples above demonstrate organization is important. Greater public support and greater funding are neither necessary nor sufficient for public policy victories. Organized interests typically defeat disorganized interests. Those who are unconcerned cannot be organized.

As discussed in the last chapter, the vast majority of the public lacks great concern about politics. The result is organized interests are a small minority.

On the other hand, some interests are so broadly shared that organization is unnecessary. College sports are so popular that there is no need to organize to deal with hypothetical opponents working to eliminate athletic competition between institutions ofhigher education. Organization is most likely when the opposing views are both minority views.

Small segments of society with no resources other than their votes achieve little or nothing by organizing. Wealthy small groups, however, have had great success, largely because they are able to target campaign funds to "deserving" candidates. As campaigning for public office has become very expensive because of "new style," television-based politics, candidates have increasingly turned to wealthy interests for campaign contributions. Costly campaigns have greatly increased the influence ofinterest groups. With effective organization, interest groups can use dollars to offset their lack of voting support. A small interest with many dollars can have far greater impact than the few votes its members represent.

Size fundamentally distinguishes interest groups from political parties. Political parties must organize first to select and elect candidates to public office and then to pass and implement policies. Large numbers are necessary for success. Pluralities and majorities are necessary for candidates to win office. Majorities and supermajorities are necessary to pass legislation. To achieve their goals, major political parties must appeal to as many voters as possible and offend as few as possible. Parties must "patch over" many differences among prospective supporters.

Some interest groups have more reason to be uncompromising. They seek to appeal to their members, and their members are not pluralities or majorities of the population. Even if small in members, their generous contributions to campaigns can give them great say. They can make their dollars speak more loudly than their votes. Iftheywere to compromise, those providing the money might decline future contributions.

Heading: Political Parties.

The first political party in the United States, called the Federalists, organized to ratifY the Constitution. To win a vote in a legislature, at least a majority oflegislators have to approve; thus, organization within the legislative body is necessary to win. One reason for political parties is to organize within the legislative body to pass laws. This can be called legislative organization. It is always easier for legislators to defeat bills than to pass them. Those who want to pass bills must organize to have success. When one side organizes, the other side must organize or risk losing. After elections, the first function of political parties is to manage the efforts of their members in the legislature.

A political party must win elections before it can coordinate the efforts of officeholders. Party activities concerned with appealing to voters and contesting and winning contests for office can be called electoral organization. With enough victories, a political party can secure the power to enact the policies it seeks. When party members think similarly about a broad range of issues, the organization becomes more enduring. They seek to retain their numbers within the legislature or to increase them to be successful on more issues. The purpose of the Jeffersonian Republicans was to resist the centralization of government advocated by the Federalists. As the poorly organized anti-Federalists, they sought unsuccessfully to stop the ratification of the Constitution.' Having lost, however, they organized to seek like-minded voters who would put their candidates into public office.

The Jeffersonian Republicans were the second U.S. political party but the first to organize both to win elections and within the halls of government. They proved to be the prototype of modern political parties. The dual-purpose organization by the Jeffersonian Republicans in combination with the unwillingness of the aristocratic Federalists to stoop to appeal for voter support resulted in the Federalists becoming irrelevant to national politics. The modern Democratic Party can trace its roots to the Jeffersonian Republicans.

Heading: A brief history of American political parties.

Today's political parties derive from events in our history. Parties become successful by articulating basic ideas that lead to electoral success. Party leaders find it difficult to venture very far from the views they believe first made them victorious. As a result, parties are slow to change and the choices given to Americans by our political parties seldom venture from what has always been offered by these political parties. What led to the positions of the two present political parties?

Sub-heading: The politics of ratifying the Constitution.

As already mentioned, the new Constitution of the United States led to the organization of the Federalists, who sought its ratification. That constitution provided a strong central government that many thought would be less sensitive to the general public's demands. Areas of commerce, primarily in seaports such as Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, sought to ratify the Constitution. A stronger central government would be able to smooth commerce between the states, and many living in these areas earned their livings in commerce. A stronger federal government could enact tariffs to give American goods a competitive advantage over English goods.

The inland areas, where most farmed to provide food and shelter for their families, saw a stronger central government as a renewed threat, not unlike the one only recently overthrown in the Revolutionary War. Those of this belief, as noted, were disorganized and were generally labeled "anti-Federalists."

From 1787 to q8g, only a fool would have run as an anti-Federalist for a state legislative seat, a U.S. House ofRepresentatives Boston district seat, or any local elective seat, given the popular support in that area for the new Constitution. The district would have been uncompetitive, with only Federalists likely to win. Rural districts would also have been uncompetitive, but in these districts only anti-Federalists could win.

Elections in statewide races for governor or U.S. senator could be competitive. If a state had a close mix of voting population in mercantile and rural areas, such as Massachusetts, it might have a balance of Federalists and anti-Federalists, with both capable of winning. The anti-Federalists in the rural areas of the state would offset the Federalists of the more urban areas. Not all states had the requisite balance. Georgia and other predominantly rural states lacked competition both in local districts and in statewide elections.

Sub-heading: The civil war.

For a time, the Civil War and its aftermath ended state and local party competition altogether. The deaths and emotion associated with the Civil War and the Reconstruction that followed divided the country into a Republican North and a Democratic South. In the North, the Democratic Party was associated with the Confederacy and the deaths of many thousands of Northern troops. Democrats could win no elections and most often did not even contest elections. Similarly, no Republican could win in the South because of what Sherman had done to the South and the later experience in Republican-controlled Reconstruction. So, neither statewide nor local contests had partisan competition. Everyone lived in a one-party state and a one-party district. Since the North had the larger population, Republicans also dominated the presidency.

With no Republicans in the South and no Democrats in the North, both political parties made only regional appeals, such as "the South will arise again" or "the South must pay." Appeals based on the ideas of states' rights were seldom heard in campaigns. Northerners had little choice but to accept the programs of the Republicans. Southerners had no alternatives to the programs offered by the Democrats.

Sub-heading: Machine politics.

Before and after the Civil War, Northern cities continued to grow. The heavy immigration after r8so and the pressing need in urban areas for municipal services returned party competition to many Northern states. Because the Civil War held little meaning for immigrants, they were receptive to ward heelers who promised municipal services. Soon only "urban machine" candidates could win in such cities. At the city or local level, politics had changed from Republicans winning uncompetitive elections to machine parties winning uncompetitive elections. Machines typically called themselves the Democratic Party, but they had no ties to the Democratic Party of the South.

Machine supporters focused on local issues and seldom considered competing for state and national offices. However, if a state had a large city to offset Republicanism in rural areas, state politics and statewide elections often proved competitive. Each political party has a good chance to win an office, such as governor or U.S. senator. Of course, with little industrialization or urbanization, the South remained uncompetitive at both the state and local levels.

When industrialization and urbanization finally came to the South after the Second World War, it led to a change in the politics of the South. Ironically, it led to Republican success in cities and continuing Democratic strength in rural areas.

Sub-heading: The new deal.

Franklin D. Roosevelt put together a coalition of Northern city residents and Southerners, most of whom already identified themselves as Democrats. The purpose of the coalition was to relieve the unemployment in the Depression of the 1930s. However, it did little to change the competitiveness of any office other than the presidency. National public policy became the pervasive concern. Being a Democrat took on a new meaning-a supporter of the New Deal rather than a Southerner.

For years, the Republicans wandered about in terms of their issue positions. Initially, they were opposed to the New Deal and opposed to civil rights. Their success in 1994 reflects popularity of their promise to reduce federal taxes while retaining the social programs of the New Deal. They also served as an alternative to the ruling Democrats when the economy was faltering. These events closely parallel the Democrats' success in the 1930s just by being the alternative to the presiding Republicans during bad times. The reversal of fortunes in 2oo6 and 2008 when Democrats regained control of the presidency and temporary control of Congress, also occurred during a time of economic stagnation and recession.

Sub-heading: Homogenizing America.

The mobility of Americans after the War and the pervasiveness of the mass media, such as television and radio, changed our politics. We moved from South to North, and later vice versa. We moved from urban to suburban areas and from rural to urban areas. Most moved seeking better jobs or a better lifestyle. Middleclass Republicans moved to the suburbs, making the older core cities, such as St. Louis and Chicago, overwhelmingly Democratic. Urban party organizations, endorsing the New Deal programs ofRoosevelt, proved appealing to Southern Republican blacks and converted them to the Democratic Party. This Democratic Party was different from the one they had known in the South.

Many Republicans moved to the South. The South's cheap, nonunion labor attracted northern industry, and many Republican managers moved along with their companies. Most often, these people persisted in voting for the Republican presidential candidate and whatever other local Republicans that were running. Gradually, some Republican candidates found enough votes to win seats in state legislatures and the U.S. House ofRepresentatives. Lately, many Republican candidates for governor have been successful. The overall pattern in the South is one of growing Republican strength in urban areas. Northerners now living in the South and young voters less emotionally committed to the traditional Democratic Party greatly altered the chances ofRepublicans in the South. Urbanization of the North and West has strengthened the competitiveness of Republicans in contesting seats in Congress and the state legislatures.

Electronic and print news media focus on national and international news to appeal to the widest possible audiences. The so-called all-news cable networks make no attempt at covering local news. Local television stations follow network news broadcasts with their own news. A 30-minute local news show typically consists of 5 minutes of national and international news, 5 minutes oflocal news and human-interest stories, 5 minutes of weather, 6 minutes of sports, and 9 minutes of commercials. Even local newspapers have more column inches on national and international news than on local news. It is easy to understand why contemporary Americans focus almost exclusively on federal politics in general and presidential politics in particular. The news media have "nationalized" our politics.

Sub-heading: Duality and lack of local competition.

There has been a continued duality in U.S. politics. While we divide on important issues, we tend to face only one such divisive issue at a time. We were first divided on accepting the new Constitution, then on slavery and states' rights, then on federal efforts to safeguard us against economic cycles, and then on civil rights. Urban and rural and North or South differences correspond to these opinion differences. If issues divided those living in urban and rural areas and if a state had nearly equal urban and rural populations, its statewide politics became competitive.

Local areas, however, have seldom been competitive. Wherever you live, there is little likelihood that your neighbors will be of a different political party. It is equally unlikely that your locally elected representative for Congress, state legislature, or local government will face competition from the other political party.

It is possible to create election districts that would enhance competition between Democrats and Republicans. But competitive districts will not be created so long as partisan elected officials choose boundaries. Political parties have no interest in being competitive, only in winning.

Historically, local districts, such as those in rural areas or deep within large cities, support only the locally dominant political party. Events have changed what that locally dominant party is over time but never resulted in much local competition. Some states with a close balance between urban and suburban or rural areas have experienced competitive statewide politics. Since r9s2, most presidential contests have been competitive in the sense that the national vote total for the major party candidates is close. But even in such competitive presidential elections, typically only rs states have close contests. Most elections in the United States are local elections, and in these, few challengers are able to unseat the incumbent of the dominant local political party.

Heading: Why we always have two major parties.

In the United States, two political parties primarily vie for public offices, although on occasion a third organization centering on an individual, such as Ross Perot in 1992 and 1996, or Ralph Nader from 1996 to 2008, places a presidential candidate on many state ballots. The Jeffersonian Republicans evolved into the Democratic political party and faced only a single opposition party. The Federalists, Whigs, and later the Republicans provided their opposition.

Although political scientists may complain about the dominance of one political party, especially in the South, competition between more than two political parties is also viewed as undesirable. Countries with more than two political parties, such as Italy and France, endure many struggles to put together a coalition to govern. Members of several political parties are needed in these countries to achieve the majority in their parliaments necessary to establish a government. These precarious governing majorities and the uncertainty and instability of government no doubt cause this concern that multiple political parties may threaten democracy. If we understood the reasons why we only have two political parties, perhaps we could assure that this continues.

Sub-heading: Good fortune.

Several factors may explain our being blessed with only two major political parties. First is that we had the 90od fortune to face only one divisive issue at a time. The agricultural versus mercantile divisions surrounding the Constitution gave way to the North versus South division and the Civil War. Similarly, the civil rights movement of the r96os replaced the controversy between the wealthy and poor reactions to Roosevelt's New Deal programs. In each of these disputes, the Democratic Party took one stance and its opposition took the other. V. 0. Key calls this dualism.

Sub-heading: Institutional factors.

Institutional factors, such as the "winner-take-all, single-member districts" are also seen as central to our two-party system. If each district has but one victor, a new third party is unlikely to see its candidate win in any district. A third party must jump from getting none of the vote to getting a plurality of the vote in at least some districts to win any representation in making government decisions. Third parties getting 30 or even forty percent of the vote, even if in many districts, will still lose. If there were multiple representatives to be selected from districts, however, a third party capable of getting a third of the popular vote might win as many as a third of the seats. All U.S. House and nearly all state legislative districts are single-member districts, meaning that third parties have little chance.

Sub-heading: Primary elections.

Primary elections are another institutional factor accounting for only two parties. Winners of the Democratic and Republican primary for an office win a place on the general election ballot as that party's candidate. Those voting their party identification can then give them their votes. Third parties have no primaries! Their candidates can get on the ballot only by exceptional means. Typically, they need a petition signed by many registered voters (several percent of the vote last cast for this office). Although primaries weaken the major political parties by taking candidate selection out of their hands, there is little question that they are fatal to third parties.

Sub-heading: Party identification.

Party identification also contributes to our two-party system. Table 7.1 documents that, since I9S2, rs percent or fewer of Americans refuse to identifY themselves with either the Democrats or the Republicans in presidential election years. You might be surprised at how consistent the levels of support are for each party over 6o years. Please keep in mind that party identification and voting are different things. Further, because of the Electoral College, distribution of electoral support is all-important in presidential elections.

Since parents transmit their party identification with great success to their children, a third political party would have to convert people as adults. Research has shown that only events such as the Civil War or the Great Depression of the 1930s have such a potential for converting people. Since the Vietnam War and World War II proved to be incapable of converting people's partisanship, however, third parties seem to have little or no chance unless we have another experience of very great magnitude. Even then, however, it was the other major political party that benefited in the past.

Sub-heading: Settlement from England.

Finally, nearly all two-party democracies are An.glo, or English by heritage. The United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom are all Anglo, two-party democracies. What is it about English heritage that results in two-party government? The reduced influence of the Roman Catholic Church in these countries may underlie their having only two parties. Other countries may have a pro-Catholic working-class party as well as an anticlerical (against the Catholic Church) working-class party. In non-Anglo democracies, even if the middle class is not divided into proand anti-Catholic political parties, there are usually at least three political parties. For a while, the Communist Party provided an additional somewhat successful party. More recently, environmental parties, such as the German Green party, have also attracted many votes.

Two of the explanations of our having a two-party system, the historical reasons, are accidental and could not be copied by other political systems. The explanations of structural barriers to third political parties would suggest that we could encourage third political parties if we wanted to do so. The party identification explanation, while not accidental, would be difficult to change to encourage third political parties. Third political parties at the presidential level stimulate the major parties to shift emphases in how they communicate their messages. Third parties have no major impact on the fundamental content of the major parties' messages.

Heading: Regulating political parties.

Even though political parties are not branches of any government, all states regulate political parties. This feature is apparently unusual among democracies and probably can be traced to the reform efforts to undo urban machine politics in the late 18oos, as discussed in Chapter 4· State laws regulating political parties are of five types. One defining membership, typically as being registered as a Democrat or as a Republican. Two defining a formal party organization and its selection, including a state party chairman and central committee with some limited responsibilities. Three allowing access to the state election ballot or denying it if the party lacks popular support. Four providing procedures for nominating candidates and holding primaries. And five restricting campaign financing or providing public funds.

Despite the overall decline in party control since increased state regulation, some state political parties persist in influencing politics. In some states, they more actively recruit candidates, contribute more campaign funds, and train candidates in necessary modern campaign skills, such as soliciting campaign funds and using election polls. Party organizations attempting all of these are labeled "well organized."

All of these efforts, no doubt, endear their political party to successful candidates; but as compared to earlier eras when a tightly organized political party could bring large numbers ofloyal supporters to the polls and assure its candidates' success in winning elections, modern political parties are weak imitations. By contrast, wealthy interests have gained the attention of candidates because they contribute the campaign funds needed in modern, television-centered campaigns.

Sub-heading: Primary elections.

States have weakened political parties by requiring primary elections.6 Before primary elections were required, parties could select their candidates however they wished and then announce their selections. Frequently, elected state legislators of the party would meet and select candidates for all legislative seats including those then held by the opposition party. No one from those districts could be sure they would have any say on nominees.

Criticism of such legislative caucuses centered on constituents in such districts having little say. Party conventions replaced these caucuses to give average party members more say in candidate selection. Conventions also have been criticized as being closed to the general public, with decisions made in smoke-filled rooms.

The ultimate reform was the primary election. Primary elections allow the public a say, but at the expense of not allowing the most active and engaged party members to pick its candidates. Best candidates would be those likely to win the general election while sharing the policy goals of the party. Low turnout in primaries often results in a very few picking their preferred candidates, who may not hold values supported by the party's supporters in the general election.

The variety of primary elections used by states is impressive. States constantly consider changing primary election systems. In almost every election cycle, some states do make changes.  Furthermore, some states permit the parties to have different primary election rules and to change them almost at will. As a result, any snapshot of state primary election systems is likely to be out of date soon. Table 7.2 lists primary election systems and states using them in elections held in 2012. The same information is presented in map form in Figure 7.1

There are three key dimensions that define primary election systems. Ballot form is the first. In three states, primary election ballots contain the names of all candidates identified by party: Republican, Democrat or minor party. Voters may one choose one candidate per office, and have the option of voting for some Republicans and some Democrats. In forty-seven states, primary election ballots list only the candidate for one party. Voters may cast one vote per office. The contests decide which candidates will run in general elections as official party candidates.

There are an additional three dimensions that apply to states with single-party ballots. The first is whether the choices voters make about which party's primary to participate are public or private. The second is when choices are made, either before the primary is held or when voters arrive at the polls. The third is whether or not the same rules apply to all potential voters.
 
Sub-heading: Ballots listing all candidates, all parties.

Until 1975, it could be said that all states required major parties to choose their candidates for general elections through primary elections. The distinction between major and minor party typically involves a turnout threshold in an earlier statewide office-usually for the office of governor. Today, all states hold elections prior to general elections and the results are linked to general elections. However, in Louisiana, California and Washington the elections prior to general elections do not necessarily choose general election candidates from each major party.

In 1975, Louisiana initiated a unique system. It was applied to federal offices from 1976 to 2006 and continues to be used for state offices. The Louisiana procedure is sometimes called a Blanket Election. The Louisiana system is exceptional because candidates who win a majority of the vote in the "early election" win the offices. In contests without majority winners, the top-two finishers run against each other in a second election.

Candidates in the first election can choose to be identified on the ballot as a candidate from any "registered" party. It is possible for second elections to have two candidates from the same party. Only Louisiana uses this system in regular elections. Texas and some other states use this system in special elections called when vacancies occur between regular elections.

Washington and California have a primary election process called the top-two system/ Its purpose is to choose two candidates who will face each other in the general election-but not necessarily candidates from each of the two major parties.

Primary election ballots list all candidates from all parties and voters may cast one vote for each office. The top-two finishers in the primary for each office-regardless of party-face each other in the general election. As in Louisiana, both contestants in the next election can identifY with the same party. Unlike Louisiana, those who win a majority in the primary election do not win office. They have to compete again in the general election.

Sub-heading: Ballots listing candidates of one party.

The 47 other states have separate primary elections for each party. These are sometimes called direct primary systems. In rs states, dissimilar rules apply to different voters or different parties. For the 32 states that apply the same rules to all, rules have two important elements: whether the choice of party ballot is made before or at the primary election and whether the choice is public or private.

In the open primary system the choice of party ballot is private and the choice is made at the primary election. In the 9 states with open primary systems, voters typically receive ballots from both parties and decide in the secrecy of the voting booth in which party's primary to vote. Except in North Dakota, primary election voters must register in advance, but they do not register by party.

In semi-open primary systems, voters' party ballot choices are made publically. Typically, voters choose at the polls places before entering the voting booth. As in the open primary system, semi-open primary voters must register in advance but do not register by party.

The closed primary system exists in 12 states. Registration is by party in advance of the primary election, and this information is public. The commitment made at registration is binding. Only those registered in a party may vote in its primary-those who register but choose neither major party are not eligible to vote in either's primary. A voter registered for one major party who wants to change and vote in the other party's primary must change his or her registration. Deadlines for registering and changing are typically 20 to 30 days before the primary election ends.

The 15 states that do not apply the same rules to all potential voters are mixed primary systems. In some states, rules differ between the major parties. For example, the Republicans may require prior registration as a Republican and the Democrats may permit registered voters who chose no party to participate in their primary elections. In other states, rules apply to both parties but individuals who registered for one of the major parties are treated differently than those who registered as "Independent." For example, registered Republicans and Democrats must vote in their parties' primaries but individuals registered as Independents may vote in either party's primary. Some states that permit primary voting by Independents require them to register for the party at the polling place, while others do not.

Some states permit the major parties to choose their rules. Ifboth parties chose the same rules, their classification for 2012 was semi-open or closed. If and when those parties choose different rules, they would be classified as mixed. Depending on the choices made by major parties, a state may effectively have a closed primary for one party and a mixed primary for the other. As a result, if parties make different decisions in the future, states could change from the closed or semi-open to the mixed system and vice versa.

Majority rule is not always the rule in state primary elections. In IIstates, typically former Confederate states, primary election candidates must win a majority. In North Carolina, a plurality of at least 40 percent is required.ro Top-two runoff elections are held when no candidate receives the required plurality or majority. States that hold runoff elections to choose party candidates keep records of which party's primaries voters participated in. Those who vote in one party's primary are not allowed to vote in other parties' runoff elections. If they could, they might vote for weaker candidates. They could "raid" the runoff elections of the party they dislike, enhancing the general election fortunes of the party they like.

Many critics think the open and top-two primaries also encourage partisans of one party to vote in the opposition party's primary. They might do so to select weak candidates that can be more easily defeated by their party's candidates in the later general election. There is, however, little evidence that this kind of voting takes place to any significant degree.

Political parties have sought to counter the effects of primaries by selecting and endorsing desirable candidates before the primary. Although this approach has been partially successful, the primaries have nevertheless greatly weakened the importance of political parties for prospective candidates.II With sufficient money, particularly when the incumbent does not seek reelection, anyone can run and win the primary of the dominant party in the area. Success in the general election should then follow. This result can be achieved without the political party involved having any say. In this situation, a Democratic or Republican candidate need not necessarily have the policy positions expected by the political party.

Sub-heading: Primary election turnout

Turnout in primary elections differs from turnout in general elections in two critical ways. First, turnout is much lower in than turnout in general elections. Second, the smaller numbers of primary election voters are more extreme in their views than the other members of their parties.

General election turnout rates from 1960 to 2012 were presented in Chapter 6, Table 6-3Table 7·3 summarizes turnout rates for presidential primary elections from 2000 to 2012.

Presidential primary elections choose some or all delegates to national party nominating conventions. Not all states chose delegates through primary elections in any or all of the four election years summarized in Table 7.3. You can tell at a glance that primary election turnout rates are much lower than the general election rates ranging from so to 59 percent. Small as the turnout rates are, they give an incorrect impression because they include, in almost all cases, voters in two or more partisan primary elections. The information in Table 7.4 is more informative.

Table 7.4 presents turnout rates of voting eligible electorates separately for Republican and Democratic primary elections held in Texas from 1998 to 2012. To facilitate comparing similar elections, turnout for presidential and non-presidential years is presented separately. The turnout rates are very low for each party. More importantly, to win party nomination, a candidate needs only more than half of primary elections votes cast.

Texas Republican presidential primary turnout ranged from 5 to 9.2 percent. Majorities for these rates range from 2.6 to 4.7 percent. Majorities for turnout in Democratic presidential primary elections ranged from 1.9 to 9.6 percent.

The majority percentages are much lower for nonpresidential election years when Texas holds all of its statewide executive branch elections. Only more than 2.0 or 2.1 percent of the eligible electorate was sufficient to win Republican Party nominations. Winning Democratic Party nominations required more than 2.4 to 3.8 percent of the eligible electorate. Republican candidates won all general election contests from 2ooo to 2012. They were nominated by as few as 2 percent of the most extremely traditional or conservative Republicans in Texas.

Texas Republicans seeking statewide office know that their first, and probably largest challenge is to secure their party's nomination. To do so, they must appeal to a very small number of voters who are not representative ofTexans or Texas Republicans. Candidates for United States Senate needed the support of4.6 percent or fewer of the voting eligible population. Candidates for state executive positions elected statewide needed only more than 2.1 percent in 1998 and 2.0 percent since 2002.

Curiously, high-powered ultra-conservative interests use low primary election turnout to threaten incumbent Texas Republicans. These groups monitor the behavior of elected officials, even to the point of reviewing votes by individual state legislators. Republican incumbents risk running against well-financed challengers in the next primary election if they do not actively work for the conservative agenda as defined by the most conservative in Texas.

In Texas and elsewhere, higher turnout general elections no longer play a moderating role in state and local politics. Incumbents are more likely to be defeated from a challenger from their own party in a primary election than a challenger from the opposite party in a general election. Partisan gerrymandering oflegislative districts and one party predominance in statewide elections have made low turnout primary elections all-important.

Heading: Roles played by contemporary parties.

Although we share the system of two dominant political parties with Great Britain, ours are often seen as not offering the clear choice that the Labor and Conservative parties offer there. When political parties take clear stands on issues, select candidates who support those party positions, educate the public on those positions, remove officeholders who do not uphold those positions, and organize themselves within the halls of government to enact those positions into law, it is called a responsible party system.12 Many believe that Britain has such a party system and that we would be better off if we were to have more responsible political parties. This is the same idea that we discussed in the preceding chapter as one source of why Americans vote less. Because our political parties are not "responsible parties," a vote does not have clear policy consequences. Not voting in such a circumstance may have no costs.

The United States seems unlikely to develop such a system; moreover, many factors now all but preclude our doing so. As we have seen, most Americans loyally support their parents' political party when voting. Many candidates can ignore political parties, relying on campaign contributions they gather themselves. And primary elections for selection of candidates weaken the political parties' ability to exclude candidates not sharing their positions. Candidates in England have no such opportunity to ignore the party.

Sub-heading: Are parties becoming less important?

There has been much concern that American political parties are in decline. Certainly, Americans in survey after survey seem more than willing to see parties vanish. They feel "the man rather than the party" should be the basis of the voting choice. Parties are seen as confusing the issues, creating conflict where none really exists, and not keeping their promises. Nevertheless, most people call themselves Democrats or Republicans. Such antipathy toward political parties is often cited as a reason parties today are not as vital as they were before World War II, but there are other reasons.

We need to be cautious in assessing the strength of U.S. political parties. Compared with political parties in most democracies, ours can little influence the reelection success of those legislators who vote as the party would prefer in passing laws and making policies. There seems little question that our parties were stron9er in the past and that today even the best or9anized party would be jud9ed quite weak when compared with those in the past or present day parties in other democracies.

Political parties' inability to influence elections does not necessarily mean that liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans are equally likely to be elected from all districts across the United States. As we have discussed, some areas are overwhelmingly likely to elect Republicans and others Democrats. And most conservatives will run as Republicans and liberals as Democrats. Weak political parties also do not mean that Democrats and Republicans will be nearly equal in number in state legislatures. Most states have one dominant political party.

Sub-heading: New style politics.

New style politics of campaigning does not rely on political party workers to establish ongoing person-to-person contact with voters. Candidates may go door to door speaking with individual residents for symbolic purposes. The major broad campaign communications use television and electronic media. Narrower, more focused communications are targeted to core voters and undecided voters. Rather than rely on party personnel, candidates hire expert campaign managers and pollsters. New style politics has created employment for, and enriched consultants, public relations firms, and television stations.

Candidates make every effort to seem trustworthy and statesmanlike, without taking positions on the issues. They concentrate mainly on what they believe. Public policy goals are addressed infrequently and specific plans to achieve goals are rarely articulated. Candidates for offices from mayor to President of the United States avow they know how to create jobs or strengthen the economy or achieve greater efficiency, etc. When pressed for details, they respond "check my internet site."

This new style of politics emulates advertising campaigns used to sell cola and cars. Attributes that are undefined or not measurable are touted. Buy our cola because it is the "real thing." Buy our cars because we are the "number one dealer." Counterpart political claims include a candidate "never forgets where she is from" or "believes in the American way oflife." The goal is to make potential voters feel good about the candidate.

Another element of the new-style politics of campaigning is "going negative." Negative campaigning has always existed in American politics, but new resources make it easier and perhaps more effective. Contemporary information technology makes it almost effortless to identifY statements that can be taken out of context or otherwise misrepresented against a political opponent. Video ads on television and the Internet employ misleading audio and video snippets of an opponent. Negative ads focus on political opponents to the near exclusion of any information about the candidates airing them.

One kind of negative campaigning involves turning a candidate's strength into a weakness. The self-named Swift Boat Veterans were so successful in questioning and criticizing Senator John Kerry's military service in the 2004 presidential election that the phrase "swift boating" has become part of our political lexicon.

Another variety of negative campaigning involves identifYing opponents with famous national figures who are unpopular locally. Virtually all candidates running as Republicans for seats in the Texas legislature in 2010 and 2012 asserted their Democratic opponents agreed one hundred percent with "overreaching liberals in Washington, D.C." Contrary to their opponents, they would "stand up to Barack Obama." A large number of candidates in Republican primaries tried to associate their Republican opponents with President Obama by juxtaposing their opponents' names and photographs with unflattering photographs ofPresident Obama. By the same token, Democrats in stronghold states such as California and Hawaii did their best to associate their Republican opponents with President George W. Bush.

All candidates criticize negative campaigning and promise not to do it. The fact that negative campaigning has become the dominant style in close elections indicates either it is effective or many believe it is effective. In an effort to control negative campaigning, Congress passed the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act in 2002. Candidates were required to identifY themselves and to say in audio ads and appear and say in video ads that they approved the communication. The net result is that feel-good ads have the candidate approval statement at the end, and negative ads have the statement at the beginning.

New style campaigning changed the roles played by the national parties. The "branding" of the national parties has become more important. Many presidential advertisements are distributed nationally through television and other media. To the extent possible, other candidates try to use the talking points developed by their parties' presidential candidates. Second, largescale transfers of funds from the national committee have played a critical role in implementing national campaign strategies through state and local parties. These efforts are targeted primarily toward the key battleground states in presidential elections. Parties in the ro to 15 states with close presidential contests get attention and support from the national committees that have the secondary impact of helping their downballot candidates.

In Table 7.1, we found very little decline in political party identification. Still, one can see a decline in partisanship in the electorate, which some see as further evidence of the decline of U.S. political parties.

For whatever reasons, Americans are somewhat less "strongly" committed to their political party than in the past. Furthermore, primaries have taken out of the political parties' hands the choice of which candidates will be called "Democrats" or "Republicans." Certainly, the advantage of the incumbent in seeking reelection has increased in Congress because of"candidate centered" campaign techniques focusing primarily on the use of television-new-style politics. The parties nevertheless persist, perhaps because they are organized. Unless they fulfill some function, however, they seem likely to be replaced by other organizations, perhaps interest groups.

Heading: Interparty competition.

Competition between the political parties has long been thought to be important in our democracy.17 The basic idea is that to compete, political parties will select their candidates more carefully and better orchestrate the passage of needed legislation. They will be more responsive to public demands and more effective in passing policies preferred by the public when they are not assured of reelection. As a result, there has been a long tradition of measuring such competition.

The most common measures of competition include the percentage of Democrats in both the upper and lower houses, the percentage of the vote won by the Democratic gubernatorial candidates, the division of which party controls the legislative houses and the governorship, and the duration of one party's control. All of these measures have been weighed equally into a single measure. However, states that are competitive statewide, may have few districts where incumbents are much challenged. Generally, the concept of competition is based on the incorrect assumption that a competitive state will be competitive regardless ofhow competition is measured.

The measure of party competition used here is based on the average difference in seats between the two parties in each legislative chamber. That average is then subtracted from roo to create an index where a low value means little competition and a high value has more competition.

In 2013, the Democrats controlled 52 percent of the Iowa Senate and Republicans controlled 53 percent of the Iowa House. The competition index value is 99. In Hawaii, Democrats held 96 percent of Senate seats and 86 percent of House seats. The competition index value is 18.

We expect that closer competitions between parties stimulate greater voter participation just as closer competitions between sports teams stimulates fan interest in those contests. There has been a longstanding hypothesis that political competition benefits the public parallel to the way that economic competition benefits the public. Many studies of the states have documented positive correlations between measures ofinterparty competition and spending overall and spending on development of human capital.

As documented in Chapter 6, competition between Republicans and Democrats is at a low point and there was no correlation between turnout and even division of House seats in 2010. Might results for 2010 be anomalous? Table 7.5 shows there were consistent positive correlations between turnout and interparty competition through 1990, and no correlations beginning in 1995. How can we explain the change?

An obvious explanation is turnout-competition relationship was never causal. It was spurious, an artifact of regional differences that altered over time. Through the early 1990s, the Southern states were strongly controlled by Democrats and interparty competition was low. Then, interparty competition increased as Southern preferences switched to Republicans. What has remained consistent has been a pattern of lower turnout in Southern states, as documented in Table 7.6. For every year, turnout in Southern states is significantly lower than turnout in Northern states.

Sub-heading: The impact of competition.

Are there patterns of differences we care about that are empirically linked to higher and lower interparty competition? In the years when turnout and interparty competition were correlated with each other, there were positive correlations between turnout and measures of taxing and spending. Do those patterns hold for 2010? Table 7.7 correlates interparty competition and problem and policy measures from Chapter 6. It would seem that past correlations between inter-party competition and policy do not hold for 2010. Interparty competition is no longer positively related to taxing and spending measures as predicted. There are significant correlations between competition and per capita debt and competition and spending per child in primary and secondary schools. However, they are negative, not positive. The only correlation in Table 7.7 that makes sense is the positive relationship between competition and how accurately party divisions in the State Houses reflect partisan preferences expressed in public opinion polls. There is little to suggest that competition influences public policy.

It is plausible that party competition might force political parties and politicians to be more responsive to the wants of the electorate. The evidence does not support this model. Perhaps the declining importance of parties has undermined such responsiveness. Political parties have been greatly weakened both by the growth of primaries as well as the growing importance of direct mass media appeals to voters paid by individual campaign funds rather than the parties. Party leadership now perhaps can do little to respond to competition.

Individual candidates, as a result, might well be expected to avoid appearing responsive to any one segment of constituents rather than being responsive to all. Perhaps at one time, party competition or the lack of it, in the South resulted in different public policies, but the evidence shows it makes little difference now.

Although overall state party competition would seem most likely to shape public policy, competition between political parties at the district level might also be important. There is evidence that local competition is decreasing. District-level competition has declined as the majority parties have created safe elections for themselves and for their opponents. There is little reason to expect district-level interparty competition to increase and to be important in the future.

Heading: The importance of party control.

We turn now to a consideration of whether the policies of states with legislatures controlled by Democrats differ from those controlled by Republicans. We might expect that a legislature controlled by Democrats would enact more liberal programs, such as civil rights legislation or programs consistent with the New Deal. Some research has supported this theory, but other research has not.

We would expect to find the liberalism of Democrats reflected in a larger tax burden and greater spending per capita. We would expect policies that place fewer restrictions on abortion and welfare benefits to be more generous. Table 7.8 presents correlations between party control and a variety of state policies in 2010. Democratic control of state legislatures is positively correlated with only four of eleven current policies.
 
All of the directions are in line with the expectation that Democrats enact more liberal policies. In 2010 greater control by Democrats was related to higher tax burdens, a larger proportion of families with children living in poverty receiving welfare assistance, greater spending on primary and secondary education per student and less restrictive abortion policies. Figure 7.2 through 7.5 are scatterplots of these relationships.

A larger number of expected relationships between party control and policy are not in evidence for 2010. Greater control by Democrats is unrelated to per capita revenue, per capita expenditure, regressivity of taxes, per capita long term debt, monthly welfare benefits for families in poverty, and percent of revenue from personal and corporate income taxes.

Table 7.9 correlates Democratic control of state legislatures with fourteen status variables. Most of them measure problem levels. The only meaningful correlation is a positive relationship between Democratic control and abortion rates. This is another expected liberal vs. conservative preference distinction. Correlations with the other thirteen measures in Table 7.9 fail to show relationships. 

While there is great variation across the states in Democratic control, there is no consistent pattern between that partisan control of state legislatures and the policy areas in Table 7.8 and 7·9·Contrary to what we might expect, state legislatures do not comprehensively review all policies each legislative session. State legislatures review some state agencies and reconsider a limited number of programs each legislative session. Other than these infrequent reviews, major policy change is driven by federal mandates, directions from state or federal courts, service failures, or revenue crises. Since policy is developed over long time periods, it might be more appropriate to look at party control over long time periods.

Studying these policies that seem to closely characterize Republican and Democratic differences does not mean that other policies might not show relationships; it seems likely that which political party controls the legislature or even the state for a long period little affects adopted policies. At an earlier time, we might have speculated that the South's conservatism but strong Democratic tradition would have obscured the relationship. Outside the South, however, there again appears to be no relationship. All that we can really conclude is that the South used to be very different but, evidently, by the 1990s, the South was not so different.

Overall, the domination of one party in a state even for a lengthy period little affects its policies.

The lack of relationships may suggest that political parties no longer achieve the organization needed to shape policy coming from a state. Parties may be too weak in modern times to shape policy. There is also the possibility that in the past, Democrat did not necessarily mean liberal and Republican did not necessarily mean conservative. With the South becoming both conservative and Republican and with the Northeast becoming both liberal and Democratic, perhaps the future will see real policy impacts in whether the Republicans or Democrats control the state. As conservative Republicans take over for conservative Democrats in the South and liberal Democrats replace liberal Republicans in the Northeast, we might expect to see more impact of the party in control.

Finally, it may well be that partisan control can have only a small but still significant impact on policies. The percentage of children not covered by state-provided health insurance might be larger as a result ofRepublican control. Right-to-work laws, which assure a worker a job even if he or she refuses to join the labor union involved, may be stricken by a Democrat-controlled legislature. Both might affect thousands of people but be lost in the data we have used. Nevertheless, the expectation of policy changes with a switch from Republican to Democratic control, although touted by the mass media and by politicians, is not evident.

Sub-heading: Conclusion on the impact of party

Our empirical analyses found no evidence that supports the generalization that interparty competition is related to state efforts or outcomes. Only three correlations were meaningful and two of those were in the wrong direction. We found more of the expected correlations between party control and policies. But there were more correlations that disconfirm empirical linkages than support them. Ifboth Republicans and Democrats do not intend to act differently in the halls of government, we might ask why they make so much of this while seeking election.

Several points might be made. First, politicians may say this to win the support of their partisans only to assure election. They may even be sincere in saying this, but the realities may be much more difficult. For example, a sincere legislature in Mississippi intent on raising TANF payments may not find the tax resources to do so. Or an equally sincere legislature in that state wanting to reduce welfare payments further may find federal provisions preclude doing so. Moreover, the legislative leadership may not have the great political skills to achieve such change against the resistance of interests that are intent on stopping such change.

State policies are not reconsidered and subject to major change every legislative session. Legislators are loath to consider tax changes. TANF payments are a combination of many factors, including the amount of state funding pledged to match federal funds, the state's schedule of payments to eligible families, and the number offamilies making claims.

Current policy is shaped by cumulative episodic decisions made over longer periods of time. It is not possible to match snapshot measures of one or multiple sessions of party control and interparty competition with when major decisions were made and by whom they were made.

What we may be seeing is the limited range of public policies legislators can significantly change. Political rhetoric may make anything sound possible, but reality may make change very limited.

Heading: Interest groups.

If political parties are weakening in the United States, interest groups seem willing and able to replace them. Our task in assessing interest or pressure groups will not be easy. While political parties must be visible and public if they are to win elections, interests need not be either visible or public to succeed. Interest groups are organizations of persons of similar interests and opinions seeking to influence public policy; but do they contribute to or detract from democracy? Despite Americans' ambivalence toward political parties, few would argue that they are undemocratic or that their existence compromises democracy. Perhaps parties have resulted in biased public policy, inefficiency, and corruption, but since people voted freely for them, they are part of democracy.

Such is not the case for pressure groups. Many, but certainly not all, people may be members of these groups, and no one votes for them. Furthermore, they organize to offset popular votes since they act between elections as well. They seek to substitute strong opinions, activism, and money for what they lack in votes.

Although it is useful to have large numbers in a pressure group, this approach has its cost when members are not similarly affected by policies. Such internal conflicts might therefore obstruct group efforts. What is most useful for a pressure group is enthusiasm or money. Enthusiasm facilitates getting group members to vote, to write, to organize, to care what happens, and to contribute money. Ample money allows interest groups to win appreciation from candidates for substantial campaign contributions to underwrite very expensive, new-style television campaigns. Ample money allows interest groups to have full-time lobbyists present in state capitals to attend and speak at public hearings. These lobbyists can advise legislators of the group's interests and gather information concerning how other sympathetic state legislatures had coped with a problem. They can establish personal relationships with legislators by offering them free meals and entertainment.

These efforts may or may not establish sympathetic response to the group's interests. They will establish two things of paramount importance: recognition and access. Conference committees typically make final decisions on key items oflegislation in the final days of sessions. At those times, the most a lobbyist can hope for is a minute or two of conversation with individual members. Access gives them the brief interaction. Recognition saves precious time; the lobbyist does not have to identifY who she is and whom she represents.

The central feature to interest groups' democratic contribution is their capacity for allowing the emotions of those strongly opinionated on issues to be vented constructively. If they lose in an election, they can contribute money to interest groups sharing their values and seek to influence elected representatives between elections and win their point in the next election. Proponents of interest groups argue that millions are either members of groups or rely on them as reference groups or guides for how they should react to proposed legislation. Involvement in interest groups is seen as another form of participation in which some opinions are heard in the process of making public policy. Interest groups can be viewed as one of many channels through which the public can speak to their representatives.

Interest groups frequently contribute information to the political process. Such groups are likely to have more technical competence than do legislators. Although they may present only their perspective in offering this technical information to legislators at public hearings, at least that information is made available. Other groups may present other relevant and contradictory information. Across the so states, legislators accept the notion that such groups provide valuable technical information and thus contribute to better public policy. Case studies of many states suggest that the interaction between lobbyists and legislators is more constructive in some states than in others. Some research shows Oregon to lead this ranking. There are few such studies because they are difficult to conduct.

Heading: The strength of interest groups

Because interest groups do not stand for election, their number and relative strength in various states are uncertain. Most states register at least some groups, most often if they wish to appear in public hearings; and most states require budget information on at least the largest groups. This information, however, leaves uncertain the relative strengths of interest groups. Although groups may be asked to indicate the number of their members and even their budgets in such reports, neither of these pieces ofinformation may determine which are most effective in getting their way. Not all states require such reports.

The National Institute on Money in State Politics used public information to identifY the number of clients reported by each registered lobbyist in each state and the total number of clients overall.30 Table 7.10 reports correlations between number of clients and other state variables.

As you might expect, there is a strong correlation between number oflobbyist clients and total population in each state in 2010. The correlation coefficient is .61. Number of clients is also related to several state variables that are also dependent on population size: total personal income, total state and local employees, and total state revenues and expenditures. Number of lobbyist clients is not related to per capita income or any other variable that controls for population size. It is perhaps surprising that number oflobby clients is unrelated to total state gross domestic product. Number oflobbyist clients is also unrelated to assessments of interest group strength made by informed persons living in each state (discussed below in more detail).

Despite arguments that interest groups contribute to better public policy and to affording the public alternative avenues to affect public policy, the suspicion remains that they pull public policy away from what we would expect were interest groups totally absent. A central problem is that not all segments of society are equally prevalent among interest groups. Interest groups over-represent the wealthy, better educated, white, males, and businesses)' Although the most effective groups in some states are public school teachers' organizations, such as those affiliated with the National Educational Association, business groups dominate the most effective ranks in most statesY General business organizations, such as chambers of commerce, bankers' associations, and manufacturers' groups, are second, third, and fourth, respectively, in most states. If interest groups are effective, there seems to be little question that they oppose rather than support the ideal of equal representation.

Heading: Efforts to control pressure groups.

Not everyone would like to see pressure groups and their impact on government eliminated. Those whose preferences coincide with influential interest groups would oppose any reduction in government programs they benefit from. Some see these groups as one of the many channels through which people can influence government policy. Elected officials who get the bulk of their campaign funds from such groups-and future rivals who hope to-may be hesitant to limit their effectiveness, let alone to abolish them.

Sub-heading: Controlling pressure groups.

Pressure groups cannot legally bribe elected officials to vote as the group wants. Money cannot be given in return for favorable votes. Groups can make contributions to campaigns with the expectation that the relationship will become mutually supportive. This is a very subtle difference, especially in states where an elected official can pocket any leftover campaign funds on retirement. Until the elections of1994, even members of Congress could move money contributed to campaigns to their own pockets on retirement. This continues to be true in many states.

Many states also require registration by pressure groups, especially if they wish to speak before legislative committees. Registration consists of filing necessary forms with information such as the membership, budget, and officers of the association, and perhaps even those bills that the group would like to speak on in public hearings. The public can then learn about the activity of pressure groups from those registrations, if they bother to check.

If candidates were able to spend only half a year's salary in their campaigns rather than the hundreds of thousands of dollars now spent, the limited funds needed could come with fewer groups and fewer strings attached. Political party and individual contributions could even provide all allowed funds. Then interest groups could not "buy" votes.

In 1976, the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that restrictions on campaign expenditures by candidates are unconstitutional, a violation of the 1st Amendment's freedom-of-speech clause, despite the fact that all other developed democracies do restrict campaign expenditures.33 In Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission 2010, the Court said limitations on spending amounted to limitations on free speech. Federal law limiting contributions by corporations, unions, and misnamed "non-political" nonprofit organizations was overturned. As a result, existing half-hearted and largely ineffective attempts by the states to control interest group spending may soon disappear.

At this point, only an amendment to the federal constitution could authorize campaign expenditure restrictions, restrictions on contributions or public financing of elections. Such an amendment would have to be proposed by those who benefit the most from uncontrolled campaign contributions: incumbent members of the U.S. Congress and state legislatures. As of July 2013, 16 state legislatures had passed resolutions calling on Congress to propose and amendment to overturn Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission 2010. These resolutions are symbolic rather than substantive.

PACs have grown enormously in numbers and influence and are rivals to political parties. They are little more than reorganized pressure groups. Often, they provide the majority of campaign funds to candidates, especially incumbents.34 PAC spending in state elections rose from $95 million in 1972 to $400 million in 1984. PACs financed 6o percent of the campaign costs for the California Assembly in 1984 and 40 percent of the funds collected by Illinois legislators in 1984-1985. Such increases are commonplace throughout the states.36 According to the Federal Election Commission, PAC contributions to federal candidates for elections held in 1999 and 2000 cycle totaled $259.8 million. The Center for Responsive Politics reports that in the 2010-2012 elections, the top 20 PAC contributors alone gave more than $915 million to candidates.

Several states have experimented in partial public financing. Until this financing is sufficient to require that taking public funds precludes using any additional funds, such as is true for presidential candidates in the past before the corrupting influence of "soft money," which allows bypassing these limits, the effectiveness of such public financing remains unknown.

In Arizona Free Enterprise Club's Freedom PAC v Bennett 2011, the Supreme Court struck down an Arizona public financing law that would have provided extra public money to candidates who were being outspent by privately funded candidates and independent expenditure groups. Arizona argued that public funds generated more speech, not less. The court determined well-funded candidates would be forced to spend more money to outspend opponents or spend less so opponents would not receive public funds.

Heading: The power and impact of pressure groups.

We have no objective measure of pressure group strength or influence. We do have a measure based on the assessments of public officials and political informants in states they know well. This is the outgrowth of the combined research of many political scientists in 50 states. This study was replicated in the late 1990s, 2002, and 2007. Table 7.11 shows the results of these studies. 

This research suggests some changes over this nearly 20-year period. Eight states saw the strength of their interest groups decline, while six states saw an increase. Nevertheless, the Midwest and the Northeast reportedly still have the weakest interest groups.

Until the early 2000s, two interests were perceived as most influential: general business organizations (including state chambers of commerce) and schoolteachers. In 2007, they are still ranked first and second. However, utility interests have joined them. These three interests surpass all others. 

We would expect pressure groups to shape public policy in a direction preferred by business. Other literature suggests that neither business groups nor any interest group has much success in shaping public policy as compared with others who influence public policy, such as political parties and institutional leaders. There is substantial variation from state to state in which groups are most influential, although, as stated earlier, business groups predominate.

Sub-heading: Conclusions on pressure groups

As noted in the introduction to interest or pressure groups, we know little of the importance of interest groups to policy-making. There is also uncertainty about whether they are democratic. We have not been able to justifY many conclusions on these groups. Certainly, they exist for a purpose. Hundreds of millions of dollars are spent each year by individuals and companies to support these groups. If an interest group organizes and pays for a lobbyist, a rival group might feel the need to countervail by organizing itself. This situation might occur even if the first group gets no clear public policy changes as a return for the money it spends seeking to affect policy. If this spending to offset others' spending logic is correct, pressure groups may be having little effect on our public policies.

The greatest concern about interest groups is that they "buy" representatives with their campaign contributions and thereby shape public policy to their satisfaction. With new-style politics, candidates need great amounts of money to compete, even if their districts are overwhelmingly uncompetitive. When pressure groups offer campaign contributions in return for the candidate's support for the group's point of view, few candidates can resist.

Sub-heading: The potential for competitiue politics

Both political parties and pressure groups are organizations actively working for the public policies they desire. They almost certainly move public policy away from what it would be were such organizations absent. Institutionally limiting or encouraging either political parties or interest groups has proven to have little effect, with one exception. Primary elections seem to have hurt political parties. If we were to reverse this action, however, and allow parties to select their candidates by whatever means they please, would they strengthen politically? And if they did, would people whose views are under-represented by pressure groups, such as the poor, be championed by at least one of the strengthened parties? Although many believe or hope so, studying the variation in the strength of political parties in the states and the variation in regulations of those parties offers little confidence in this result.

We have found only modest support for many of the hypothesized relationships between political parties, pressure groups, and policy. The party of the poor, the Democratic Party, sometimes appears to be the advocate of that class. But often no relationship exists. Competition between the political parties also fails to have clear and consistent empirical relationships with state policy. Competition appears to have the most effect. Competitive political parties do not seem to be found in states with weaker pressure groups. Such may not have always been the case, however, since the parties may have once controlled pressure groups. More probably, however, time has just changed the role of political parties.

At one time, political parties may have been perfectly adequate for representing divisions between what people in urban, mercantile areas wanted versus what people in rural, agricultural areas preferred. With economic complexity, however, subtle economic differences may be lost when there are only two or perhaps even three or four political parties. Automotive workers, the elderly, students, or residents in states with poor health facilities may be too small in number for a political party to be concerned with either their plight or their votes. Interest groups may allow such groups to express their views, supplementing the role of political parties.

Political parties in states with competitive parties and weak pressure groups may be able to reflect political divisions within the state that do not entail the more subtle reflection of interests available through pressure groups. Party and pressure group systems may just reflect the politics of the state. Pressure groups also may reflect, rather than shape, society.

Can we envision a political system with numerous pressure groups and no political parties vying in elections? It probably would look very much like a multiparty system. We might suspect that candidates would then seek the middle ground to appeal to more groups, win elections, seek out like-minded fellow representatives, and organize to pass policy. Those policies would be used to appeal for further voter support, by arguing that it is better to get something that they want rather than nothing. In effect, this scenario would suggest that political parties would reappear.

Heading: Summary

1. Those of like mind on the issues of the day can often overwhelm their opponents by organizing to get their supporters elected and to pass the desired policies into law. Political parties were the first such organizations, but interest groups also organize to enact desired policies.

2. At one time, political parties were stronger than they are today in the United States.

3· Political primaries and a new style of campaign using expensive television commercials paid for by interest groups have weakened political parties. It is also clear that many Americans are willing to cast their votes for candidates solely on the basis of which political party candidates are listed under.

4. States and districts with nearly equal numbers of Democrats and Republicans probably have more competitive political parties, and improved organization results from the parties seeking to optimize their chances. Few states or districts, however, have such balance.

5. Neither party control nor interparty competition consistently affects the policies on which we focused.

6. Interest groups are also organizations that seek to influence public policy to promote their interests. Business interest groups are most influential. There is evidence that would suggest interest groups are becoming stronger while political parties weaken.

7. Money is one of the major sources of influence for interest groups and is mainly applied by way of contributing to the campaign funds of incumbent legislators in the hopes of getting them to feel obligated to vote as the groups want.

8. Since the Supreme Court has judged campaign expenditure limitations and public funding of election campaigns as unconstitutional, there are few options for limiting the influence of interest groups.

9. Comprehensive subjective data available to assess the impact of interest groups suggest that they have little impact on state policies for taxing, spending, aid for the poor, or abortion. Stories and case studies of interest group successes suggest the opposite.