Chapter 11. Adjudicating the law: policy and the courts.

Other than giving coverage to sensational trials, the mass media (newspapers, magazines, television, and radio) limit their coverage of the judicial branch of government largely to decisions announced by the you ess Supreme Court. Thus, one might get the impression that only the federal courts are important in our society. Apart from the you ess Supreme Court, the reality is just the opposite: only the state courts are very important, Nearly all trials and other court activities are in the state and local court systems, not in our federal courts.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported 44,800 jobs in the United States for category "Judges and Hearing Officers". There are 860 positions in federal courts; the other 44,000 are in state and local judicial systems. More than 98 percent of Judges and Hearing Officers are employed at the state and local levels.

State and local courts dealt with 99 point 5 percent of new civil and criminal cases filed in 2014. In 2014, 79 point 2 million criminal cases were filed in state courts and only 91,964 in federal courts; state courts dealt with more than 99 point 8 percent of all criminal cases. Similarly, state and local courts, rather than the federal courts, adjudicate civil cases.

Of more than 19 million civil cases filed in 2014, more than 98 percent were in state courts. State courts are most central to American criminal justice because nearly all laws that people can violate are state laws. If accused and brought to trial, proceedings will be held within state court systems. Statutes that prohibit certain behaviors, from murder to jaywalking, are typically state laws. State or local governments most frequently prosecute criminal cases. The more serious violations are called felonies and carry substantial fines and imprisonment penalties. Less serious crimes are misdemeanors.

Civil cases involve disputes between two or more individuals where individuals include both people and legal entities such as corporations, partnerships, sole proprietor business organizations, and nonprofit organizations. Most often, disputes concern contracts. Plaintiffs avow that defendants have caused them to suffer losses and file lawsuits seeking compensation. Across the United States, there will be millions of court trials every working day in state and local courts. You probably will be called multiple times in the future to fulfill your civic duty to serve on a jury involving a criminal or civil case. On each occasion, the probability is 99 percent that you will be called to a state or local court. There is only a very small chance that you will ever be called for service in a federal court.

Heading. Organizing The Courts.

We have a dual court system. Wherever you live, there are two court systems, one state and one federal. The state court systems and our federal court system share the same basic organization. At the bottom of both federal and state court systems are the trial courts. They have various names, but "district" court is most common. The federal system trial court is named district court.

Most Americans have criminal trial courts in mind when they think about courts of law. In criminal cases, the state’s attorney argues for the conviction of the accused, based on evidence presented in court; the defense attorney pree cents evidence of the defendant’s innocence; a jury decides the guilt or innocence mainly by unanimous agreement among 12 jurors (defendants may choose to have judges rather than juries make these decisions); and a judge, in robes, assures fair procedures. With rare exception, only trial courts hold trials.

It is also in the criminal trial courts that you have the "bill of rights" protections from the you ess Constitution. Rights for the criminally accused in the individual state constitutions also apply. In the years after World War II, the you ess Supreme Court extended the same rights in criminal procedures in federal courts to those charged in state courts. But if the state constitution offers additional protection, those rights are accorded to you as well. You have the following constitutional rights in a criminal case in state or federal courts: Amendment five [rights of accused persons in criminal trials] No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentation or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or in public danger; nor shall any person be subject/or the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.

Amendment six [right to speedy trial and more criminal trial protections] In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.

Amendment eight [bails and punishments] Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. In addition, Amendment seven assures, in civil cases, a trial by jury and compliance with common law. Most of these provisions now apply in state courts whether or not they are also in the state’s constitution. Notice that a 12-person jury of one’s peers and a unanimous verdict are not mentioned, although they are available to defendants in federal criminal cases. This is an example of how legal tradition supplements a brief constitution that lacks detail.

Criminal trials result in defendants being judged guilty or not guilty. Punishments are assessed against defendants convicted of crimes. Civil trials result in judgments for plaintiffs or defendants. Damages are awarded to plaintiffs who prevail. Once a trial is complete, the loser may then "appeal" to an intermediate appellate court. Appeals claim that serious errors occurred during the trial. Appeals argue that, absent these errors, a result more favorable to the loser would have occurred. Appellate courts may be required at least to consider such appeals. But, apart from review by one appellate court judge and staff, few receive any serious attention.

When an appellate court accepts a case, multiple judges examine the court wreck ord from the trial. Public hearings are held for judges to ask questions of the attorneys representing those involved about trial courts’ "errors in procedures," and "consistency with other court decisions." Incompatibility with the state or national constitutions, what is called "unconstitutionality," also is a major consideration by these courts. They do not retry the case.

Substantive decisions--whether or not defendants are guilty in criminal cases or liable for damages in civil cases--are not reviewed by appellate courts. Appellate courts review procedural decisions made during trials and decide whether to uphold or overrule those decisions. When decisions are upheld, trial outcomes are sustained. When trial court procedural decisions are overruled, trial conclusions concerning guilt and liability are vacated. Such cases are remanded, returned for retrial. Appellate courts can also decide that the criminal or civil laws applied during trials are unconstitutional. Laws determined to be unconstitutional are declared invalid and cannot be the bases for retrials.

Losing parties in appellate cases can appeal to what is usually called the state supreme court. This court is the final appellate court, the court of last resort at the state level. Texas and Oklahoma have two courts of last resort, one that considers only criminal cases and one that considers only civil cases. A separate appeal to the federal court system may be possible if there is a procedural issue subject to federal law. Federal courts decide whether or not to accept these appeals.

As with the intermediate appellate court, the state supreme court need not give much consideration to cases appealed to it. However, state supreme courts review all death sentences.

Again, cases are not retried if accepted by supreme courts. Rather, they review the court records and previous appellate court considerations of the case. Individuals and groups not involved in the original trials may submit documents that give advice about issues in cases to appellate courts. These arguments are called ameecus curiae, friend of the court briefs. The justices may then hold public hearings and ask additional questions of the attorneys in the case. Courts of last resort either uphold or reverse appellate court decisions. Trial results may be upheld, results may be vacated and cases returned for retrial, and laws may be found unconstitutional.

As you might expect, intermediate appellate courts accept few cases from trial courts, and even fewer are considered by the supreme courts. About 0 point 09 percent of all cases--civil, criminal, juvenile, and traffic--reach the intermediate courts, and 0 point 01 percent reach the state supreme courts. The cost of attempting an appeal is expensive. For most, the low probability of an appeal being accepted makes the cost prohibitively expensive. The result is corporations are the most likely parties to seek appeals.

Many states divide their trial court levels into a tangle of courts, each with limited jurisdiction. This means, for example, they might deal only with juvenile cases, only with cases involving penalties of less than $1,000, or only with cases involving no jail terms. Local courts with extremely narrow jurisdictions, such as small claims and traffic courts, also further complicate this level of courts.

Most states have phased out justice of the peace courts as outdated and subject to fraud. Judges in some such courts receive pay as a percentage of fines imposed, and therefore more fines mean more pay. Unpopular "speed traps" in rural areas typically may involve cooperation between local police seeking to gain revenue for their cities and justices of the peace eager to earn more money.

Although uncommon, state cases can be appealed to the you ess Supreme Court. The most frequent basis is the argument that state law or legal procedure cun flicks with the United States Constitution. The you ess Supreme Court accepts fewer than 200 cases each year, so few cases will make the jump. Supreme Court justices choose cases that will let them address points of law they wish to resolve. Usually, cases must first work their way up the state court system, but not always. Exceptions may be granted for cases that originate in federal district courts that cannot be transferred to state appellate courts.

Heading. Appellate Court Activity.

Once appellate courts accept cases, they can judge the constitutionality both of the laws involved and the way they are administered. This is the way the judicial branch checks and balances the behavior of the legislative and executive branches. States vary considerably in the extent to which appellate courts can accept or reject individual cases on appeal.

In 2014, state appellate courts accepted more than 252,000 new cases. Courts of last resort handled 28 percent of those cases; lower appellate courts handled 72 percent. As always, there were important differences across the states. California appellate courts accepted more than 22,000 new cases. Wyoming appellate courts accepted 900 new cases. The quantity and quality of appellate court activity vary from state to state.

Heading. Appellate Court Activism.

The phrase judicial activism means different things to different people. Most frequently, those who dislike court decisions use the phrase. They intend it as an insult, not as a concept that is defined precisely and used consistently. When pundits speak of judicial activism, they are saying, "I am not happy."

Conservative critics prefer a more limited role for the courts as interpreters of the law rather than makers of the law, which they call judicial restraint. They argue that the courts should defer to the elected legislative and executive branches. These branches are closer to the people and more likely to follow the will of the majority. They have articulated this view so frequently and successfully that most Americans assume or believe that all court limitations on legislative and executive branch decisions are liberal. Although courts also uphold legislative and executive branch actions, commentators typically disregard those decisions. They focus on activist liberal decisions and disregard activist conservative decisions.

Political scientists seeking an objective, valid and reliable measure, define judicial activism as decisions that find government laws or behavior unconstitutional. In other words, judicial activism occurs when courts play their balancing role of checking the legislative and executive branches. Some researchers have studied decisions systematically and classified individual decisions as activism or restraint. They have contemplated the possibility of conservative activist and liberal restraint outcomes.

Empirical evidence from academic research shows the examples stressed by conservative pundits are not representative of the way courts behave. Thomas M Keck argues that the you ess Supreme Court has been more active in finding federal statutes and executive procedures unconstitutional since 1995, when a majority of justices were conservative, than at any previous point in the Court’s history.

More recently, the Supreme Court under Chief Justice John Roberts has made a series of conservative decisions finding legislatures and executives took unconstitutional actions. Comprehensive analyses find that, for more than 15 years, the you ess Supreme Court made more activist conservative decisions than activist liberal decisions. However, the liberal activist decisions have received the greatest publicity.

Some state courts have been identified as judicially active because they have made high profile "liberal" decisions declaring certain state imposed limitations on personal rights unconstitutional with respect ID their state constitutions’ bills of rights. Courts in California and New Jersey have frequently been identified as the most activist or the earliest activist.

However, when activist decisions are defined as those that overturn actions by executive and legislative branches, results do not support the view that activism equals liberal decisions.

Results presented from a study of state courts from 1981 to 1985 defined judicial activism as finding executives or legislatures had violated state constitutions. The juxtaposition of New York, West Virginia, Alabama, and Montana as most active demonstrates that activism in state courts is not strongly related to state liberalism or liberal decisions.

The State Supreme Court Data Project gathered information on 21,000 decisions made by state supreme courts from 1995 to 1998. State constitutionality was an issue in 5% of cases. Federal constitutionality was an issue in 3% of cases. Violations of state constitutions were declared in 21% of germane cases. Violations of the you ess Constitution were declared in 14% of germane cases. State courts found violations in 18% of germane cases overall. The large study of decisions from 1995 to 1998 found constitutionality issues were rarely reviewed. When reviewed, almost one in five cases involved a violation.

Federal and state courts participate fully in the system of checks and balances through the exercise of judicial review, which empowers courts to invalidate the actions of the other branches of government inconsistent with state or federal constitutions. The most highly publicized decisions are those involving the most controversial issues on the American political agenda. These decisions are most often defined in terms of liberal and conservative positions. Although small in number, they dominate popular discussion of judicial activism and the role the courts play in federal and state politics.

Heading. Minority Rights.

Decisions by courts to declare statutory laws and executive procedures as unconstitutional have been depicted as being counter to the majority rule principle fundamental to American democracy. Almost all government systems worldwide profess to follow the majority rule principle. Even hereditary monarchs and religious officials who hold power in theocracies claim the majority supports them.

We think the great genius of the American political system is that it is concerned with both majority rule and minority rights. The United States is among the small number of countries worldwide that make minority rights the more important, more fundamental concern.

As our constitutional system has evolved, we have come to recognize that, given the opportunity, majorities frequently choose to withhold from unpopular minority groups rights and privileges they enjoy themselves. The legislative and executive branches are structured to be more responsive to majority preferences. As a result, their actions have sometimes been detrimental to out-of-favor minorities.

Courts have been more active than the other two branches in championing the cause of minority rights under the law because that is the role assigned to them by federal and state constitutions. Although not all court decisions do so, judges have acted frequently to uphold and expand equal protection and equal application of criminal and civil laws.

Sub-Heading. Equal Protection Under Criminal Law.

In the United States, only a minority of citizens are accused or convicted of serious crimes. Those who are accused or convicted are an unpopular minority. Beginning in the 1950s, the you ess Supreme Court has, in a large number of its decisions, applied the federal minimum standards of justice in our national Constitution to state criminal procedures. Three principles stand out in their importance to state criminal procedures.

The first is the "exclusionary rule," which excludes illegally seized evidence from being presented in trials. The case is Mapp versus Ohio (1961). When miz Mapp refused to allow police to search her home, they ignored her and did so anyway. They found no evidence connecting her to a bombing for which she was suspected but rather found pornographic materials that were unlawful. She was arrested and convicted based on the gathered evidence. The Supreme Court overturned her conviction because without a search warrant specifying pornographic materials, the evidence was unlawfully obtained. Such evidence is to be excluded from the courts.

Although the initial principle was clearly drawn, the Supreme Court has weakened it with more recent decisions. The Court has established exceptions to the exclusionary rule to ensure the benefits of Fourth Amendment rights to privacy are not outweighed by the rule’s social costs. In July 2016, it made a major modification in the exclusionary rule in Utah versus Strieff (2016). The court held that the exclusionary rule does not apply when an officer makes an illegal stop (that is, a stop without probable cause), runs a warrant check on the suspect’s ID, learns that the suspect has an outstanding warrant, and then searches the suspect incident to arrest on the warrant. The court held that the evidence seized was admissible because the officer’s discovery of the arrest warrant attenuated the connection between the unlawful stop and the evidence seized incident to arrest.

The second principle is the right to legal representation established in Gideon versus Wainwright (1963). Bari Gideon, unable to afford an attorney, unsuccessfully defended himself on a charge that he rifled a soda machine in a pool hall. While in prison, he studied law and successfully appealed his case to the Supreme Court. He maintained that it was unconstitutional for him to have been allowed to defend himself. Rather, he argued, the state should have provided an attorney. The Court agreed. His case involved a felony, a serious crime, but this principle has since been extended to even lesser crimes, misdemeanors, potentially involving incarceration. Moreover, now the assistance of an attorney is to be provided at the time one becomes the prime suspect.

The third principle is the right to remain silent, first established Miranda versus Arizona (1966). Miranda confessed to a crime but was not told he could speak to an attorney and remain silent. The Supreme Court said the police had violated his rights to be informed. They had not told him that he had the right to remain silent, that anything he said might be used against him, and that he had a right to an attorney. This procedure of the police enumerating these rights has become called "Mirandizing" the accused.

The Miranda Warning card reads as follows: You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law. You have the right to talk to a lawyer and have him present with you while you are being questioned. If you cannot afford to hire a lawyer, one will be appointed to represent you before any questioning if you wish. You can decide at any time to exercise these rights and not answer any questions or make any statements.

Because of these and other decisions by the federal courts, the right to counsel has been defined and expanded. This right is not restricted to those who can afford it. It is not limited to adults. It is not restricted to trials. One might think that the legal counsel one has a right to must be qualified or competent, but the you ess Supreme Court has not explicitly stated what level of competence is required to satisfy the right to counsel. In the absence of a national standard, states have determined their own standards. These standards vary widely.

States disagree on whether "qualified" requires previous experience or previous success in criminal law. In Texas, a defense attorney need only be qualified at the time he or she is appointed; previous or subsequent suspension of the attorney’s license to practice law need not be considered. States disagree on whether or not the following are grounds for determining that defense counsel was inadequate: doing no work in preparation for trial, calling no witnesses, not challenging incompetent expert witnesses, permitting false testimony, sleeping during legal proceedings, having a debilitating medical condition, being disinterested in defending the accused because of racism, and having undisclosed business or romantic relationships with others involved in the case, including judges, prosecuting attorneys, and witnesses.

Sub-heading. Death Penalty.

The use of the death penalty has become an important criminal law issue in contemporary America. The number of states with death penalty punishments peaked in 1995 at 38. In 2016, 18 states have abolished the death penalty; the governors of five states have declared moratoriums on executions and four states have not had executions in the last ten years.

The you ess Supreme Court has not declared the death penalty unconstitutional, but it has acted to restrict its application. In 2002, the Court barred the execution of mentally retarded defendants. In 2005, it ruled that the Constitution bars the death penalty for crimes committed before the age of 18. The most recent restriction was in 2008. In Kennedy versus Louisiana (2008), the Court struck down as unconstitutional a Louisiana statute that allowed the death penalty for the rape of a child where the victim did not die.

The Kennedy versus Louisiana majority opinion stated that the 8th Amendment’s protection against excessive or cruel and unusual punishments "draws meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society." The court explicitly acknowledged "difficulties in administering the penalty to ensure against its arbitrary and capricious application."

Arbitrary and capricious application of the death penalty denies the equal protection guaranteed by the federal constitution and all 50 state constitutions. Throughout our history, African-Americans have been more likely to be convicted of capital crimes and more likely to be executed. The differences far exceed the standards for the statistical significance we use in this text. Even if capital punishment is constitutional in principle, the apparent inability or unwillingness of at least some state governments to administer it without racial bias may be arbitrary and capricious.

The growing number of cases in which individuals convicted and sentenced to death and subsequently exonerated by DNA tests and other physical evidence casts additional serious doubt that the death penalty can be administered accurately, let alone equally or fairly. Since 1973, 138 inmates were found to be innocent and released from death row. In a 2011 Gallup Poll only 52 percent of Americans said the death penalty is applied fairly.

The procedure of execution by lethal injection has become an issue. In 2011, the European Union banned export of drugs used for lethal injection to the United States. In addition, a number of pharmaceutical companies in the United States stopped manufacturing drugs used for lethal-injection. When death-penalty states ran out of drugs used successfully in the past, they changed to different drugs. A series of botched executions by lethal injection in 2014 resulted in delays of executions and appeals that lethal-injection violated the you ess Constitution’s Eighth Amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. In Glossip versus Gross (2015) the Supreme Court ruled that Oklahoma’s use of lethal injection did not violate the ban on cruel and unusual punishment. The vote was 5 to 4, with the conservative justices in the majority.

Evidence of wrongful executions and racial bias notwithstanding, the American public favors the death penalty for persons convicted of murder. With the exception of the years 1957-1967, this has been true since polling began in 1937. According to the Gallup Poll, support for the death penalty peaked at 80 percent in 1994 and was 61 percent in 2015. So long as the decision is made by majority rule, the death penalty will continue in the United States in the foreseeable future. Only if the courts determine that the administration and implementation of the death penalty violates equal protection standards or the constitutional ban on cruel and unusual behavior is it likely to be abolished.

Heading. Equal Protection Under Civil Law.

Perhaps the most important actions taken by courts to enhance equal protection under civil law have involved declaring criminal statutory laws unconstitutional and forbidding the states from criminalizing and punishing the behaviors involved. Voiding criminal laws and guaranteeing equal protection as a civil right under federal and state constitutions have advanced equal protection under civil law.

Consensus on which individuals and groups should receive equal protection has greatly changed since the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of 17 89 were written. Originally, women and slaves had limited legal rights and no political rights. Even after slavery was changed from legal to illegal, state and local governments throughout the nation denied equal protection under law to African-Americans. In some states, inequality resulted from uneequal application of laws. In other states, laws required separation of races. In every case, separation meant that African-Americans were denied opportunities available to others. It is worth noting that racial inequality occurred in more places after the abolition of slavery than before. Post-reconstruction racial discrimination was expanded from slaves to all African-Americans. Discrimination affected not only former slaves and their descendants but also individuals who had not been slaves--whether or not they had been in the United States or even alive when slavery was legal.

Today, the courts have established that equal protection cannot he arbitrarily withheld from individuals and groups on the basis of sex, race, national origin, religion, age, or disability. The contemporary legal standard is that government must have a legitimate reason for differential treatment. All three branches of the federal government have taken action to advance civil rights. Typically, action by some state governments to expand civil rights has come before comparable federal action. Nevertheless, it is the you ess Supreme Court that has led the way in declaring unconstitutional many occurrences of majority groups denying to unpopular minorities legal rights or privileges they grant to themselves.

The you ess Supreme Court’s landmark decision Brown versus Board of Education (1954) is one of the most important in the Court’s history. Prior to Brown, states had the option of operating dual, racially segregated public schools. Such segregation did not violate equal protection constitutional guarantees of due process or equal protection so long as segregated facilities and services were arguably equal. In Brown versus Board of Education, the Supreme Court declared that "separate but equal" public schools were inherently unequal and impermissible under the constitution. All public school systems were to be desegregated with "all deliberate speed." Southern states succeeded in delaying racial desegregation of public schools, but they were unable to prevent it.

Southern states’ efforts to prevent interaction between races included laws forbidding certain interracial activities. African-Americans had to use different restrooms and drinking fountains, wait for trains in separate areas, and ride in different sections of trains and buses. It was also a violation of criminal law for "whites" and "non-whites" to marry. Furthermore, couples legally married in other states committed criminal offenses by behaving as married couples in states where such marriages were forbidden. Illegal intermarriage was a felony punishable by many years in prison.

The you ess Supreme Court decision Loving versus Virginia (1967) declared that racial limitations on marriage violated the due process guarantees of the 14th Amendment. Not only did the Court decriminalize interracial marriage, it declared that marriage was one of the basic civil rights and the right to marry was a fundamental freedom. At one time or another, 41 states had laws making marriage or cohabitation between "whites" and "other races" illegal, although the definition of "other races" varied from state to state. All but 16 states had repealed these laws prior to the Loving versus Virginia decision.

In Lawrence versus Texas (2003) the you ess Supreme Court found that state laws could not make private sexual practices between consenting adults of the same sex criminal. The decision stated that, under the due process clause of the federal constitution, two adults have the right to engage in private con duct without government intervention. The majority opinion stated, "The Texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the individual’s personal and private life." The Lawrence versus Texas opinion expressly overruled the Court’s decision in Bowers versus Hardwick (1986), which had come to an opposite conclusion. At the time, Texas was one of 13 states proscribing sodomy. Laws in four of those states, including Texas, made only homosexual sodomy illegal. Lawrence versus Texas also established privacy rights for both opposite sex and same sex couples.

The courts have placed important restrictions on states’ legal authority to define private con duct between consenting adults as criminal. The states remain free to define adulthood. As always, they reach different decisions. There are multiple definitions of adulthood across states and within states for different purposes.

You may be familiar with the concept "age of consent" but probably don’t know that states can, and frequently do have different ages of consent for marriage without the approval of one’s parents and ages of consent for adult private con duct. Most states have multiple exceptions to their nominal ages of consent. The minimum age is 16 in 30 states, 17 in 8 states and 18 in 12 states.

There is another limitation on private con duct between consenting adults related to marital status. Adultery is a criminal offense in about half the states, although there is no common definition of adultery. In some states, adultery is defined as relations between any two people not married to each other. In other states, at least one of the individuals involved must be married. In yet other states, adultery involves a married woman having relations with someone other than her husband. The criminal penalties for those found guilty range from a misdemeanor fine of $10 to a felony life sentence in prison. In the you ess military, adultery is a potential court-martial offense. The civilian statutes are rarely enforced, if ever. It is very difficult for the administration of any rarely enforced law to meet the equal protection standard.

The issue of who has the right to civil marriage has arisen again in your lifetime. The legal issue is whether same sex couples should have the same marriage rights as eligible opposite sex couples. Civil marriage is distinct from and more limited in scope than religious marriage. Civil marriage involves only contract agreements and property rights between partners. Religious marriage contains these secular elements but also includes religious sanctification. Holy matrimony involves ceremony, tradition, beliefs, faith and social commitments.

Religious marriage authorizes sexual relations between partners. For many believers, relations without religious marriages are sinful. Sexual behavior is a central concern of religious marriage. The decision in Lawrence versus Texas (2003) effectively removed issues of sexual relations from civil marriage.

With few exceptions, federal and state governments are forbidden from prohibiting private sexual con duct between consenting adults. Court rulings have removed the overlap between sinful and illegal behavior. However, for most Americans, conflated notions of sinful and illegal sexual con duct endure.

The central legal issue of contemporary civil marriage in the United States is simply whether government has a legitimate basis for granting civil marriage contract and property rights to opposite sex couples while denying those rights to same sex couples. The Supreme Court issued two important decisions on same sex marriage, one in June 2013 and the other in June 2015.

In United States versus Windsor (2013), the court struck down the Section 2 of the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) that denied federal benefits to same sex couples that were granted to opposite sex couples. The Court ruled that DOMA violated the Fifth Amendment’s guarantee of equal protection of the law to persons of the same sex who were legally married under the laws of their state. The Court ordered the federal government to treat legal opposite sex marriages and same sex marriages equally.

The majority opinion in United States versus Windsor (2013) contained the following statements:

DOMA is unconstitutional as a deprivation of the equal liberty of persons that is protected by the Fifth Amendment.

DOMA’s history of enactment and its own text demonstrate that interference with the equal dignity of same sex marriages, conferred by the States in the exercise of their sovereign power, was more than an incidental effect of the federal statute. It was its essence.

DOMA’s principal effect is to identify and make unequal a subset of state sanctioned marriages. It contrives to deprive some couples married under the laws of their State, but not others, of both rights and responsibilities, creating two contradictory marriage regimes within the same State.

United States versus Windsor (2013) did not address the central legal issue of civil marriage for state governments. Section 2 of the Defense of Marriage Act explicitly allowed states to refuse to recognize same sex marriages performed under the laws of other States. United States versus Windsor (2013) did not directly challenge Section 2 and the Supreme Court did not rule on it. The federal government had to recognize all legal same sex marriages. The states were free to set their own policies.

A large number of lawsuits were filed in both state and federal courts pressing the question: If the you ess Constitution requires the federal government to recognize same sex marriages performed in states where they are legal, does the same requirement apply to the states? Other lawsuits pressed the question: Does the logic of the United States versus Windsor (2013) decision mean that states must sanction marriage for both opposite sex and same sex couples?

From July 2013 to June 2015, state courts issued 18 decisions, federal district courts issued 41 decisions and federal appellate courts issued 5 decisions requiring marriage equality. However, the you ess Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit upheld same sex marriage bans in Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio and Tennessee. Given the conflicting decisions of federal appellate courts, the Supreme Court had to resolve the central issue of marriage rights once and for all.

On June 26, 2015, the Supreme Court issued its decision on whether or not states can sanction marriage for opposite sex couples and deny marriage for same sex couples. The Court held in Obergefell versus Hodges (2015) that the Fourteenth Amendment requires states to license civil marriage between two people of the same sex and to recognize a marriage between two people of the same sex when their marriage was lawfully licensed and performed out-of-state.

Immediately, civil disobedience to the ruling, and to instructions issued by governors and other state authorities, occurred among clerks and other court employees in Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee, and Texas. Some Texas county clerks refused to issue marriage lye senses to same sex couples. Others chose to stop issuing any marriage lye senses. A few county clerks in Texas, Mississippi and Arkansas resigned rather than issue marriage lye senses.

Three days after the Supreme Court decision was announced, Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton issued a statement calling the Supreme Court decision a "lawless ruling." Paxton’s statement also said "It is important to note that any clerk who wishes to defend their religious objections and who chooses not to issue lye senses may well face litigation and/or a fine. But, numerous lawyers stand ready to assist clerks defending their religious beliefs, in many cases on a pro-bono basis, and I will do everything I can from this office to be a public voice for those standing in defense of their rights."

The Texas Attorney General was not making a legal argument that the Supreme Court decision was lawless, and he was not offering legal assistance from his office to those who chose to disobey the Supreme Court ruling. He was making a political statement supporting the preferences of the very socially conservative Texans who are the majority of those who vote in Republican primary elections in non-presidential election years.

The legal position of the Texas Attorney General’s Office was made clear on July 1, 2015. The Texas Attorney General’s Office wrote to the you ess 5th Circuit Court of Appeals conceding that the state’s ban on same sex marriage and failure to recognize lawful marriages performed out-of-state were unconstitutional.

Symbolic opposition to same sex marriage will undoubtedly continue across the states for a long time. Proposals have been made to amend the United States Constitution to forbid same sex marriage. Other proposals have been made to stop appointing federal judges for unlimited terms and to allow voters to remove judges who make unpopular decisions.

Many political actors have chosen to exploit public confusion between civil and religious marriage for their own purposes rather than educate the public on the differences. Arguments that religious organizations will be forced to conduct same sex marriages in violation of their religious doctrines are untrue and intended to frighten. Arkansas Governor Asa Hutchinson noted the Supreme Court’s decision was aimed only at states, and is not a directive for churches or pastors. Most scholars, even among gay rights advocates, believe that the Constitution protects clergy from being required to officiate at marriages for same sex couples and churches from being forced to allow same sex couples to marry in their sanctuaries.

Important legal issues will inevitably arise in the areas in which religious organizations engage in commerce related to marriage that is partly or entirely civil in nature. Consider the example of a church that profitably rents its property for civil weddings and weddings conducted by religious officials unaffiliated with the church. Can such a church legally limit rentals to opposite sex marriages only?

Legal battles have begun over the extent to which private businesses can legally refuse goods and services for marriages involving same sex couples, based on owners’ or employees’ religious beliefs. Existing federal law does not extend across-the-board equal protection rights to same sex couples. The extent to which nondiscrimination laws apply to sexual orientation varies across the states and within the states. As always, state and local governments will exercise their options to have different policies unless and until the federal government requires a single policy for all.

Heading. Selecting State Judges.

The President of the United States, with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoints federal judges for life. They cannot be held accountable, either to the public, to Congress, or to the president, after they have assumed their positions. Only infirmity, voluntary retirement, or death will remove them from the bench. In sharp contrast, the voters elect most state judges for a limited term of office. There are five basic methods used in the states for selecting judges. Several states, however, use more than one system. The oldest is probably that of appointment with state senate advice and consent. The governor appoints judges with the consent of a majority of the state senate, often from a listing of qualified judges from special commissions. Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York (at the appellate level), Rhode Island, South Carolina, and Vermont use this method.

Two states continue to use legislative appointment. Most South Carolina and Virginia judges gain their seats by a majority vote of the state legislature. At least in South Carolina, most judges selected are former state legislators, probably as a reward for legislative service.

Partisan elections are another older method. Under this system, Democrat and Republican candidates contest all judgeships. The voter must cast a vote for a Democrat or a Republican candidate for judge. Partisan elections are used to choose judges in Alabama, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, and West Virginia. Six of these states use this method nearly exclusively.

The newest method of selecting judges is called the Missouri Plan, because Missouri first adopted it. Under this system, a judicial selection or nomination committee with representation of attorneys or the state bar association submits a listing of three to six "qualified" candidates to the governor, who fills the vaecant judgeship from this list. After serving 1 to 3 years, the appointee must stand for a retention election, which is merely a yes or no vote. If a majority votes yes, the judge serves a full term before again standing for a retention election. If a majority votes no, a vacancy is declared and the procedure begins anew. This procedure is supposed to choose more qualified judges and to relieve judges from needing to make promises to defeat challengers in elections. They run on their records as judges, not against opponents.

Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas (other than in smaller district courts), Nebraska, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming use this plan to select most of their judges regardless of whether the judge is to serve in the appellate courts or trial-level courts. Many other states—Florida, Kansas, and Oklahoma—use the Missouri Plan for appellate judges and nonpartisan elections for trial-level judges. Interestingly, Missouri selects some lower-level judges by partisan ballot. Indiana and Tennessee do this as well. New Mexico, Pennsylvania and North Carolina use a variation of the Missouri Plan. Judges are originally selected by election rather than by appointment. Judges who wish to continue when their terms are up must stand for retention elections.

The major changes in the last 4 decades have been adoption of the Missouri Plan; change from partisan to nonpartisan elections, and adding retention elections if the Governor does not appoint judges.

Clearly, older selection methods, such as gubernatorial appointment with state senate confirmation, legislative appointment, and even partisan election, are preferred by the older states, while the West uses nonpartisan elections and the Missouri Plan. The South proves very diverse.

In summary, the selection of state judges follows many patterns. Often, appellate-level judges and trial level judges are selected differently. Reformers would advocate the Missouri Plan or at least nonpartisan elections. There is little evidence that the method of selecting judges has much impact on the quality of those judges in Missouri or elsewhere. Selection of judges follows the pattern of popular ideas present when the selection process was chosen, and there are, as a result, many mainly regional differences.

Regardless of the method of electoral selection, incumbency advantage is very common for the judicial branch. Very few incumbents lose elections.

Heading. The Term of Office.

State court judges in Rhode Island are appointed for life. State court judges in Massachusetts and New Hampshire may serve until age 70. The other states limit judges in courts of last resort to individual terms of 6 to 14 years. Appellate court judges in states that limit service serve terms of up to 12 years. District court judges in other states serve terms of 4 to 14 years. State Supreme Court judges serve an average term of just over 8 years. The most common terms are as follows: 17 states have 6-year terms, 12 have 8-year terms, and 12 have 10-year terms. Trial-level judges typically serve 6 to 8 years before needing to seek reelection. All states provide for impeaching judges in their state legislatures, but few permit recall votes to remove them from the bench.

Heading. Qualifications for Judgeships.

With the exceptions of Massachusetts and New Hampshire, all states require that judges be licensed to practice law. Almost all of them also require membership in the state bar, often for at least 5 years. Attorneys, thus, are even more highly overrepresented in the judicial branch than in the other branches. Twenty states also set minimum ages for serving as trial or appellate court judges. The most frequent minimum age is 30. Other age requirements range from 18 to 35 years.

Judges, like their counterparts in the executive and legislative branches are overwhelmingly male, white, middle class, better educated, and wealthier. The racial and gender composition of the state court appellate bench has been reported as strikingly similar to the you ess Court of Appeals, where about 31 percent of the judges are women or racial minorities. Hurwitz and Lanier report that 37 percent of judges in state courts of last resort and 34 percent of judges in intermediate appellate courts are women and racial minorities.

Like legislators, elected judges enjoy overwhelming incumbency advantage in winning reelection. For example, from 1986 to 2004, the rate of incumbent defeat in state Supreme Court elections was never higher than 12 point 3 percent. The average rate of incumbent defeat was less than 9 percent. This suggests that, although they are viewed as held accountable to the public, judges are largely out of the public view, with few thinking to vote against them for their actions on the bench. There were major differences in incumbent success rates across different election systems. The defeat rate in retention elections was 2 point 1 percent, in nonpartisan elections 5 point 2 percent, and in partisan elections 28 point 1 percent.

After notable successes in reducing partisan judicial elections, the focus of judicial selection reformers has shifted toward ending judicial elections altogether. The American Bar Association is the leading proponent of this change, charging that judicial elections, both partisan and nonpartisan, have become "noisier, nastier, and costlier."

There is some evidence that an ethnic or partisan bias among judges may influence justice. If you are, for example, the defendant in a criminal case, the wife in a divorce, a debtor, the victim of an employee in jury case, or a government agency in a business regulation case you likely will get more favorable justice from judges who are from minority backgrounds. Not unexpectedly, Democratic judges, at least in appellate courts, also tend to side with that group. These findings are not surprising and probably still hold true, although more recent research would be desirable.

Sub-heading. Compensation.

State Supreme Court judges receive the highest salary of state judges. California presently pays its Supreme Court judges the highest at $232,060, and those in Mississippi receive the lowest at $126,293. The average is approximately $162,000. Intermediate appellate courts are the next best paid. Finally, the trial court level pays the lowest, typically $120,000 to $160,000. Most Americans could live comfortably on such salaries, but most judges could earn more as private attorneys. At least this is the commonly made claim for why their salaries need to be high.

Heading. Caseload, Crime, and Punishment.

The United States is often depicted as a litigious society, one in which being sued is common. Most Americans believe crimes against individuals and property are increasing, widespread and threatening. We will assess civil litigation and criminal cases with empirical data. Civil cases filed annually increased 16 percent; and criminal cases filed annually increased 32 percent. During these years, the population of the United States increased 18 percent.

From 1994 to 2009 the number of criminal cases filed increased 32 percent. At the same time, the number of violent and property crimes decreased 24 percent. From 1994 to 2011 the number of violent and property crimes decreased 27 percent. The disparity in crime and case numbers is not easy to explain.

Probation is the most frequent form of supervision. Prison is the next most frequent followed by jail and parole, which are essentially tied. The total number of persons supervised increased through 2009 and then declined. Total incarceration, the sum of prison and jail, peaked in 2009 and then declined a bit.

From 1994 to 2014, the number of violent crimes decreased 37% and the number of nonviolent crimes decreased 32%. From 1994 to 2009, incarcerations increased 56%. Other supervision increased 38% from 1994-2009 and then decreased 6% from 2009 values. Clearly crime decreased but punishment increased in this period.

Sub-heading. Relationships Involving Crime and Punishment.

Using national data, there is no evidence to support the hypothesis that there is a positive relationship between crime and punishment. If anything, the data suggest a negative relationship. However, while these data provide useful descriptions of crime and punishment trends, they do not control for population size.

Summing state crimes and punishments each year for the entire nation makes no use of information on how the states differ. Our criminal justice system does not administer a national policy. States and their local governments define for themselves what is criminal and determine their own punishment policies. If there is a link between crime and punishment, it must be assessed comparing the states, not with summed state data.

The single-year comparative state analyses for 2013 reverses the direction of the longitudinal results for the country as a whole from 1994 to 2010.

Incarceration rates are positively correlated and above the 0 point 30 threshold, for 7 of 9 crime rates. The correlations below point 30 are point 29 and point 25. This suggests that state incarceration is a reaction to crime. The highest correlation is between murder rates and incarceration rates, r is equal to 0 point 74. There is unimpressive evidence of a similar link between crime rates and other correctional supervision rates. Only three of 9 correlations meet or slightly exceed 0 point 30.

Incarceration rates are positively or negatively correlated and above the 0 point 30 threshold for 11 of 13 measures. Other correctional supervision is negatively correlated above the 0 point 30 threshold for 2 of 13 measures. Incarceration rate is positively correlated with poverty rates, infant mortality rates, restrictiveness of abortion policy and percent republicans in the state legislature. Incarceration rate is negatively correlated with per capita income, TANF benefits, and families with children in poverty receiving TANF benefits, state and local tax burden, state and local revenue per capita, voting age population and voting eligible population turnout.

Once again, incarceration rates have more strong relationships than other correctional supervision rates. Incarceration rates are positively correlated above the 0 point 30 threshold with age adjusted death rate, percent conservative and percent African American. Incarceration rates are negatively correlated above the 0 point 30 threshold with measures of educational attainment, median age and African American population.

State incarceration rates are strongly related to crime rates and criminal cases prosecuted. Incarceration rates are also related to measures of social need, resources brought to bear, politics and values and race/ethnicity. Untangling spurious relationships from potential causal relationships is a daunting task.

Heading. Additional Issues.

States with substantial criminal or civil caseloads must pay the costs of providing the courts and judges necessary to deal with the burden of cases. Both the trial and possible appeals can be avoided by plea-bargaining. If someone accused of a criminal offense agrees to plead "guilty," no trial needs to be held. Usually, however, the accused have to be encouraged into such a plea, with the more serious offense being dropped in return for a guilty plea on a lesser offense. Certainly, plea-bargaining relieves an overburdened court system. Critics, however, note that the criminal does not pay the prescribed penalty for the offense committed, which may mean that he or she will return more quickly to society and commit another crime.

While there are no exact estimates of the proportion of cases that are resolved through plea-bargaining, scholars estimate that about 90 to 95 percent of both federal and state court cases are resolved through this process. Trying these cases in court might require a tenfold increase in court capacity. Few politicians are likely to advocate such additional expense, regardless of their rhetorical displeasure with plea-bargaining.

Despite the Gideon versus Wainwright (1963) decision’s assurance of legal counsel there is no provision that such an attorney will be a good one. In Bell versus Cone (2002), the you ess Supreme Court addressed the issue of how effective the counsel guaranteed by the 6th Amendment must be. The court ruled that the inadequacy has to be so extreme as to amount to not just bad legal representation, but the equivalent of an absence of legal representation. Anything short of that requires the defendant to argue and prove that, but for the lawyer’s performance, the outcome of the trial would actually have been different. The Court’s action in a related case, Cockrell versus Burdine (2002), established that an attorney sleeping throughout trial proceedings was an example of absence of legal representation. Even among those who can afford to hire an attorney, few can afford the best. A popular cartoon portrays an attorney asking of a client, "How much justice can you afford?" All legal proceedings in the United States are expensive, and the wealthy probably get better justice.

No one would argue that criminal justice administered by the states is perfect, but the frequency of wrongful convictions is substantial, and the impact on the lives of unjustly imprisoned individuals and their families is tragic. There is no national effort to identify and correct wrongful convictions caused by pre-DNA testing procedures, mishandling of evidence, laboratory mistakes use of subsequently discredited "scientific" tests or mis con duct by police or prosecutors.

Through June 2016, Texas had paid one hundred and one men and women who were wrongfully sent to prison 93 point 6 million dollars according to data from the state comptroller’s office. Individuals declared to be "actually innocent" after conviction are eligible for $80,000 for each year of incarceration and become eligible for monthly annuity payments for the rest of their lives, unless they are later convicted of felonies.

The National Registry of Exonerations reported 149 exonerations in 2015. Texas led the nation in overall exonerations with 54. New York was a distant second with 17. Of the 54 Texas exonerations, 43 were in Harris County alone. The conviction review section of the Harris County District Attorney’s office identified 42 of the 47 wrongful drug convictions recorded for the entire country in 2015. Conviction integrity units identified 58 nationwide wrongful convictions in 2015. Conviction integrity units are optional, and only 24 existed in the United States in 2015.

Finally, justice is not uniform across the country. In some areas, acts that are criminal behaviors elsewhere are perfectly legal and more commonly, the severity of the penalty for a criminal act varies greatly from state to state. There is also variation within a state. Prosecuting attorneys are typically based in geographical districts that differ in population size, makeup, and values. Particularly at the county level, prosecutors may be more or less active in pursuing cases involving so-called victimless crimes. The probability of being prosecuted or found guilty, as well as the severity of any penalty, varies greatly both between states and within states.

There is some evidence, furthermore, to suggest that the mass media’s emphasis on numbers of crimes rather than the crime rate results in more numerous guilty verdicts and more severe punishments. There is also the use of grand juries by prosecutors largely for their own political careers. They may gain notoriety by using the grand jury’s inquiry into possible crimes as a springboard to higher office.

The Constitution guarantees only a trial by an impartial jury, not one by one’s peers. Regardless, there is good reason to believe that the typical trial jury is neither. Most states call jurors from the rolls of those registered to vote, which makes even the initial draw biased against those who are unregistered. Additionally, states typically excuse students, mothers of small children, and small businessmen whose livelihood might be affected by serving on a jury. Thus, additional bias is added to prospective juries.

Furthermore, attorneys for the two sides in criminal and civil cases may excuse prospective jurors because they seem unlikely to vote for their clients. Many persons are employed to assist attorneys in "tailoring" juries into being the most favorable possible jury for their clients. Neither the plaintiffs’ nor defendants’ attorneys seek unbiased jurors. On the contrary, they all seek jurors biased in favor of their clients. Given all of these biasing influences on our trial juries, it is thus improbable that a defendant will be judged by an impartial jury of his or her peers.

Heading. Summary.

1. In the United States, we have a dual court system with both state and federal courts. Each system has trial courts where cases are tried, as well as appellate courts that may hear cases on appeal.

2. The generalization that activist courts make liberal decisions is not based on comprehensive analyses of decisions. Analysis of all cases with a valid and reliable measure of activist decisions concludes that in recent years, the you ess Supreme Court has made more activist conservative than activist liberal decisions.

3. The Constitution affords those accused of crimes many protections in federal courts. Most of these protections have been extended to those accused in state courts, whether or not they were also included in state constitutions. Several you ess Supreme Court decisions, such as Mapp versus Ohio, Gideon versus Wainwright, and Miranda versus Arizona, have also structured how the courts, in particular state courts, deal with crime in the courtroom.

4. Consensus on which individuals and groups should receive equal protection under law has changed throughout American history. The courts have taken the leed role in this issue.

5. Who has the right to marriage sanctioned by state government is a highly publicized and important contemporary civil rights issue. The United States Supreme Court has essentially ruled that states must treat opposite sex and same sex marriages the same way. The extent to which nondiscrimination laws apply to same sex couples varies across the states. Disputes about decisions related to same sex marriage will result in ongoing litigation.

6. State judges are selected in a variety of ways and the Missouri plan is the most popular. In this method, a knowledgeable committee selects applicants with merit for final selection by the governor. Voters later get to approve or disapprove of the individual selected. Three states use the retention election element of the Missouri Plan.

7. At the national level, numbers of crimes have decreased since 1994, but numbers of criminal cases and prisoners incarcerated have increased. At the same time, analyses of state rate measures show strong links between crime and incarceration punishment. Incarceration rate is also correlated with a large proportion of social, policy and demographic measures across the states.

8. Plea-bargaining, better justice for the wealthy, and other problems plague our modern courts, and there seems little chance to solve them. There are only a few conviction integrity units within state governments. The states have yet to make a comprehensive effort to identify and rectify the problems of wrongful convictions.
