Howdy beta testers. Thanks for taking the time to try out this application. This is an example file that will give you enough text to test the navigation features of the application. The final text selection will be longer and more comprehensive of the topic. This is a brief section of text to give you a feel for how participants will access the study.

Chapter Heading: The executive branch of state governments.

Much information pertaining to the executive branch in our national government applies to the executive branches of the states and communities. Since the bi­cameral legislature and executive checks and balances in the national Constitution copied the government form of the states and municipal governments at the time, this should not be surprising. The Massachusetts constitution written in 1780 served as a model for the federal constitution of 1787. More importantly, English city government followed the same pattern beginning hundreds of years earlier.

The generalization that governors are similar to the president is of limited utility because the powers of the governors differ from one state to another. Different powers given to state governors allow us to inquire whether they affect the actions that are taken by the states. The governor, as the top official of the execu­tive branch of state government, is expected to provide leadership in solving social problems. We also expect this of the president at the national level. Besides providing leadership, governors are supposed to be representative of and responsive to the public. Ameri­cans have not always had such high expectations of our governors.

Heading: Ambivalence toward the executive.

American ideas about state government's executive branch, and the governor in particular, have ranged widely over our history. Americans initially viewed the governor with outright hostility, given their experiences with the king's governor. Ten of the original 13 states initially had a single-year term for their governors, be­lieving that they could quickly remove those who acted irresponsibly. At present, the executive is expected to provide policy leadership. We expect governors to be "vigorous, incisive, and thoroughly trained leaders. This change has been caused by the competition of states in a very complex world economy as well as by the problems, such as crime and urban decay, inherent in the concentration of people in metropolitan areas.

Andrew Jackson's idea that the president should also be a representative of the public, along with the grow­ing role of the public in selecting the president, influ­enced thinking among the states about governors. His perspective on presidential politics included the idea that "to the victor belonged the spoils" of government. In the resulting spoils system, the winning president or governor appointed supporters to all available govern­mental offices, as a reward for their support in winning the election. With a turnover in the executive branch, supporters of the new officeholder would replace all previous government workers.

The situation changed as states faced the need to address problems such as crime, regulation of business and industry, the inequitable distribution of wealth in local school districts, and other problems that come with contemporary economies and urban life. Legisla­tures tend to be reactive rather than proactive institu­tions. They rarely are venues of creativity. Instead, they most of ten deliberate ideas that originate elsewhere. The office of the governor was well positioned to co-or­dinate the substantive knowledge of executive branch bureaucrats and draft proposals for problem-solving legislation. Executive leadership from the governor thus became urgent in our expectations. "Good-time Charlies" could no longer be tolerated as governors.

Heading: The modern governor.

The institutional powers of governors vary across the states largely because of the different feelings toward the office noted above. Powers derived from the state constitutions include length of term, veto powers, fragmentation of the state executive and appointive powers for lesser offices, and budget-making powers. Some governors have strong powers and thus might be expected to have more influence on what their state does, whether for good or for bad. 

Sub-Heading: Term of office.

At the low point in recent gubernatorial powers, most governors were elected for two-year terms. So were members of lower legislative chambers in most states. These short terms encouraged responsiveness and representativeness. With only two years between elec­tions, representatives must always be aware that the voters may defeat them for failing to act as the voters prefer. At least this was the argument for such short terms. Some states, such as Alabama, when George Wallace was governor, would not even allow a governor to serve consecutive two-year terms. Wallace sought unsuccessfully to avoid this by having his wife win the governorship for the next two-year term, presumably to be followed by George Wallace the term after that.

Short terms handicap governors seeking to change state policies. Legislators and bureaucrats could simply stall until the next election when someone else would win office. Longer terms would seem to strengthen the governor's opportunity to influence policy. A four-year gubernatorial term has become the norm. Since 1955, nineteen states have switched from two to four year gubernatorial terms. Only two states now re­tain a two-year gubernatorial term: New Hampshire and Vermont. Neither limits the number of such terms.

There are differences in how many terms the gov­ernor may serve. Fourteen states impose no limits whatsoever. Eight states have an absolute limit of two terms. Twenty-three states require that a governor leave after two terms for a 4-year period and may then return. Four states limit service to 8 or 12 of 16 years, and Virginia allows a 4-year term and then 4 years off.