Heading. Minority Rights.

Decisions by courts to declare statutory laws and executive procedures as unconstitutional have been depicted as being counter to the majority rule principle fundamental to American democracy. Almost all government systems worldwide profess to follow the majority rule principle. Even hereditary monarchs and religious officials who hold power in theocracies claim the majority supports them.

We think the great genius of the American political system is that it is concerned with both majority rule and minority rights. The United States is among the small number of countries worldwide that make minority rights the more important, more fundamental concern.

As our constitutional system has evolved, we have come to recognize that, given the opportunity, majorities frequently choose to withhold from unpopular minority groups rights and privileges they enjoy themselves. The legislative and executive branches are structured to be more responsive to majority preferences. As a result, their actions have sometimes been detrimental to out-of-favor minorities.

Courts have been more active than the other two branches in championing the cause of minority rights under the law because that is the role assigned to them by federal and state constitutions. Although not all court decisions do so, judges have acted frequently to uphold and expand equal protection and equal application of criminal and civil laws.

Sub-Heading. Equal Protection Under Criminal Law.

In the United States, only a minority of citizens are accused or convicted of serious crimes. Those who are accused or convicted are an unpopular minority. Beginning in the 1950s, the you ess Supreme Court has, in a large number of its decisions, applied the federal minimum standards of justice in our national Constitution to state criminal procedures. Three principles stand out in their importance to state criminal procedures.

The first is the "exclusionary rule," which excludes illegally seized evidence from being presented in trials. The case is Mapp versus Ohio (1961). When miz Mapp refused to allow police to search her home, they ignored her and did so anyway. They found no evidence connecting her to a bombing for which she was suspected but rather found pornographic materials that were unlawful. She was arrested and convicted based on the gathered evidence. The Supreme Court overturned her conviction because without a search warrant specifying pornographic materials, the evidence was unlawfully obtained. Such evidence is to be excluded from the courts.

Although the initial principle was clearly drawn, the Supreme Court has weakened it with more recent decisions. The Court has established exceptions to the exclusionary rule to ensure the benefits of Fourth Amendment rights to privacy are not outweighed by the rule’s social costs. In July 2016, it made a major modification in the exclusionary rule in Utah versus Strieff (2016). The court held that the exclusionary rule does not apply when an officer makes an illegal stop (that is, a stop without probable cause), runs a warrant check on the suspect’s ID, learns that the suspect has an outstanding warrant, and then searches the suspect incident to arrest on the warrant. The court held that the evidence seized was admissible because the officer’s discovery of the arrest warrant attenuated the connection between the unlawful stop and the evidence seized incident to arrest.

The second principle is the right to legal representation established in Gideon versus Wainwright (1963). Bari Gideon, unable to afford an attorney, unsuccessfully defended himself on a charge that he rifled a soda machine in a pool hall. While in prison, he studied law and successfully appealed his case to the Supreme Court. He maintained that it was unconstitutional for him to have been allowed to defend himself. Rather, he argued, the state should have provided an attorney. The Court agreed.

The third principle is the right to remain silent, first established Miranda versus Arizona (1966). Miranda confessed to a crime but was not told he could speak to an attorney and remain silent. The Supreme Court said the police had violated his rights to be informed. They had not told him that he had the right to remain silent, that anything he said might be used against him, and that he had a right to an attorney. This procedure of the police enumerating these rights has become called "Mirandizing" the accused.

One might think that the legal counsel one has a right to must be qualified or competent, but the you ess Supreme Court has not explicitly stated what level of competence is required to satisfy the right to counsel. In the absence of a national standard, states have determined their own standards. These standards vary widely.

States disagree on whether "qualified" requires previous experience or previous success in criminal law. In Texas, a defense attorney need only be qualified at the time he or she is appointed; previous or subsequent suspension of the attorney’s license to practice law need not be considered. States disagree on whether or not the following are grounds for determining that defense counsel was inadequate: doing no work in preparation for trial, calling no witnesses, not challenging incompetent expert witnesses, permitting false testimony, sleeping during legal proceedings, having a debilitating medical condition, being disinterested in defending the accused because of racism, and having undisclosed business or romantic relationships with others involved in the case, including judges, prosecuting attorneys, and witnesses.

Sub-heading. Death Penalty.

The use of the death penalty has become an important criminal law issue in contemporary America. The number of states with death penalty punishments peaked in 1995 at 38. In 2016, 18 states have abolished the death penalty; the governors of five states have declared moratoriums on executions and four states have not had executions in the last ten years.

The you ess Supreme Court has not declared the death penalty unconstitutional, but it has acted to restrict its application. In 2002, the Court barred the execution of mentally retarded defendants. In 2005, it ruled that the Constitution bars the death penalty for crimes committed before the age of 18. The most recent restriction was in 2008. In Kennedy versus Louisiana (2008), the Court struck down as unconstitutional a Louisiana statute that allowed the death penalty for the rape of a child where the victim did not die.

The Kennedy versus Louisiana majority opinion stated that the 8th Amendment’s protection against excessive or cruel and unusual punishments "draws meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society." The court explicitly acknowledged "difficulties in administering the penalty to ensure against its arbitrary and capricious application."

Arbitrary and capricious application of the death penalty denies the equal protection guaranteed by the federal constitution and all 50 state constitutions. Throughout our history, African-Americans have been more likely to be convicted of capital crimes and more likely to be executed. The differences far exceed the standards for the statistical significance we use in this text. Even if capital punishment is constitutional in principle, the apparent inability or unwillingness of at least some state governments to administer it without racial bias may be arbitrary and capricious.

The procedure of execution by lethal injection has become an issue. In 2011, the European Union banned export of drugs used for lethal injection to the United States. In addition, a number of pharmaceutical companies in the United States stopped manufacturing drugs used for lethal-injection. When death-penalty states ran out of drugs used successfully in the past, they changed to different drugs. A series of botched executions by lethal injection in 2014 resulted in delays of executions and appeals that lethal-injection violated the you ess Constitution’s Eighth Amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. In Glossip versus Gross (2015) the Supreme Court ruled that Oklahoma’s use of lethal injection did not violate the ban on cruel and unusual punishment. The vote was 5 to 4, with the conservative justices in the majority.

Evidence of wrongful executions and racial bias notwithstanding, the American public favors the death penalty for persons convicted of murder. With the exception of the years 1957-1967, this has been true since polling began in 1937. According to the Gallup Poll, support for the death penalty peaked at 80 percent in 1994 and was 61 percent in 2015. So long as the decision is made by majority rule, the death penalty will continue in the United States in the foreseeable future. Only if the courts determine that the administration and implementation of the death penalty violates equal protection standards or the constitutional ban on cruel and unusual behavior is it likely to be abolished.

Sub-heading. Equal Protection Under Civil Law.

	Perhaps the most important actions taken by courts to enhance equal protection under civil law have involved declaring criminal statutory laws unconstitutional and forbidding the states from criminalizing and punishing the behaviors involved. Voiding criminal laws and guaranteeing equal protection as a civil right under federal and state constitutions have advanced equal protection under civil law.

Consensus on which individuals and groups should receive equal protection has greatly changed since the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of 17 89 were written. Originally, women and slaves had limited legal rights and no political rights. Even after slavery was changed from legal to illegal, state and local governments throughout the nation denied equal protection under law to African-Americans. In some states, inequality resulted from unequal application of laws. In other states, laws required separation of races. In every case, separation meant that African-Americans were denied opportunities available to others. It is worth noting that racial inequality occurred in more places after the abolition of slavery than before. Post-reconstruction racial discrimination was expanded from slaves to all African-Americans. Discrimination affected not only former slaves and their descendants but also individuals who had not been slaves--whether or not they had been in the United States or even alive when slavery was legal.

Today, the courts have established that equal protection cannot be arbitrarily withheld from individuals and groups on the basis of sex, race, national origin, religion, age, or disability. The contemporary legal standard is that government must have a legitimate reason for differential treatment. All three branches of the federal government have taken action to advance civil rights. Typically, action by some state governments to expand civil rights has come before comparable federal action. Nevertheless, it is the you ess Supreme Court that has led the way in declaring unconstitutional many occurrences of majority groups denying to unpopular minorities legal rights or privileges they grant to themselves.

The you ess Supreme Court’s landmark decision Brown versus Board of Education (1954) is one of the most important in the Court’s history. Prior to Brown, states had the option of operating dual, racially segregated public schools. Such segregation did not violate equal protection constitutional guarantees of due process or equal protection so long as segregated facilities and services were arguably equal. In Brown versus Board of Education, the Supreme Court declared that "separate but equal" public schools were inherently unequal and impermissible under the constitution. All public school systems were to be desegregated with "all deliberate speed." Southern states succeeded in delaying racial desegregation of public schools, but they were unable to prevent it.

Southern states’ efforts to prevent interaction between races included laws forbidding certain interracial activities. African-Americans had to use different restrooms and drinking fountains, wait for trains in separate areas, and ride in different sections of trains and buses. It was also a violation of criminal law for "whites" and "non-whites" to marry. Furthermore, couples legally married in other states committed criminal offenses by behaving as married couples in states where such marriages were forbidden. Illegal intermarriage was a felony punishable by many years in prison.

The you ess Supreme Court decision Loving versus Virginia (1967) declared that racial limitations on marriage violated the due process guarantees of the 14th Amendment. Not only did the Court decriminalize interracial marriage, it declared that marriage was one of the basic civil rights and the right to marry was a fundamental freedom. At one time or another, 41 states had laws making marriage or cohabitation between "whites" and "other races" illegal, although the definition of "other races" varied from state to state. All but 16 states had repealed these laws prior to the Loving versus Virginia decision.

In Lawrence versus Texas (2003) the you ess Supreme Court found that state laws could not make private sexual practices between consenting adults of the same sex criminal. The decision stated that, under the due process clause of the federal constitution, two adults have the right to engage in private con duct without government intervention. The majority opinion stated, "The Texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the individual’s personal and private life." The Lawrence versus Texas opinion expressly overruled the Court’s decision in Bowers versus Hardwick (1986), which had come to an opposite conclusion. At the time, Texas was one of 13 states proscribing sodomy. Laws in four of those states, including Texas, made only homosexual sodomy illegal. Lawrence versus Texas also established privacy rights for both opposite sex and same sex couples.

The states remain free to define adulthood. As always, they reach different decisions. There are multiple definitions of adulthood across states and within states for different purposes.

You may be familiar with the concept "age of consent" but probably don’t know that states can, and frequently do have different ages of consent for marriage without the approval of one’s parents and ages of consent for adult private con duct. Most states have multiple exceptions to their nominal ages of consent. The minimum age is 16 in 30 states, 17 in 8 states and 18 in 12 states.

There is another limitation on private con duct between consenting adults related to marital status. Adultery is a criminal offense in about half the states, although there is no common definition of adultery. In some states, adultery is defined as relations between any two people not married to each other. In other states, at least one of the individuals involved must be married. In yet other states, adultery involves a married woman having relations with someone other than her husband. The criminal penalties for those found guilty range from a misdemeanor fine of $10 to a felony life sentence in prison. In the you ess military, adultery is a potential court-martial offense. The civilian statutes are rarely enforced, if ever. It is very difficult for the administration of any rarely enforced law to meet the equal protection standard.
